
===== PAGE 1 =====
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
The Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott This eBook is for the use of
anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.net
Title: How to Write Clearly Rules and Exercises on English Composition
Author: Edwin A. Abbott
Release Date: September 14, 2007 [EBook #22600]
Language: English
Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO WRITE CLEARLY ***
Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Richard J. Shiffer and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net
[Transcriber's Note: Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as possible, including
obsolete and variant spellings and other inconsistencies. Text that has been changed to correct an obvious
error is noted at the end of this ebook.
Text set in bold print is indicated by asterisks, i.e., *Bold*.]
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
1


===== PAGE 2 =====
HOW TO WRITE CLEARLY.
RULES AND EXERCISES
ON
ENGLISH COMPOSITION.
BY THE
REV. EDWIN A. ABBOTT, M.A.,
HEAD MASTER OF THE CITY OF LONDON SCHOOL.
[Illustration: QUI LEGIT REGIT]
THE AUTHOR'S COPYRIGHT EDITION.
BOSTON: ROBERTS BROTHERS. 1883.
UNIVERSITY PRESS: JOHN WILSON & SON. CAMBRIDGE.
PREFACE.
Almost every English boy can be taught to write clearly, so far at least as clearness depends upon the
arrangement of words. Force, elegance, and variety of style are more difficult to teach, and far more difficult
to learn; but clear writing can be reduced to rules. To teach the art of writing clearly is the main object of
these Rules and Exercises.
Ambiguity may arise, not only from bad arrangement, but also from other causes--from the misuse of single
words, and from confused thought. These causes are not removable by definite rules, and therefore, though
not neglected, are not prominently considered in this book. My object rather is to point out some few
continually recurring causes of ambiguity, and to suggest definite remedies in each case. Speeches in
Parliament, newspaper narratives and articles, and, above all, resolutions at public meetings, furnish abundant
instances of obscurity arising from the monotonous neglect of some dozen simple rules.
The art of writing forcibly is, of course, a valuable acquisition--almost as valuable as the art of writing clearly.
But forcible expression is not, like clear expression, a mere question of mechanism and of the manipulation of
words; it is a much higher power, and implies much more.
Writing clearly does not imply thinking clearly. A man may think and reason as obscurely as Dogberry
himself, but he may (though it is not probable that he will) be able to write clearly for all that. Writing
clearly--so far as arrangement of words is concerned--is a mere matter of adverbs, conjunctions, prepositions,
and auxiliary verbs, placed and repeated according to definite rules.[1] Even obscure or illogical thought can
be clearly expressed; indeed, the transparent medium of clear writing is not least beneficial when it reveals the
illogical nature of the meaning beneath it.
On the other hand, if a man is to write forcibly, he must (to use a well-known illustration) describe Jerusalem
as "sown with salt," not as "captured," and the Jews not as being "subdued" but as "almost exterminated" by
Titus. But what does this imply? It implies knowledge, and very often a great deal of knowledge, and it
implies also a vivid imagination. The writer must have eyes to see the vivid side of everything, as well as
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
words to describe what he sees. Hence forcible writing, and of course tasteful writing also, is far less a matter
of rules than is clear writing; and hence, though forcible writing is exemplified in the exercises, clear writing
occupies most of the space devoted to the rules.
Boys who are studying Latin and Greek stand in especial need of help to enable them to write a long English
sentence clearly. The periods of Thucydides and Cicero are not easily rendered into our idiom without some
knowledge of the links that connect an English sentence.
There is scarcely any better training, rhetorical as well as logical, than the task of construing Thucydides into
genuine English; but the flat, vague, long-winded Greek-English and Latin-English imposture that is often
tolerated in our examinations and is allowed to pass current for genuine English, diminishes instead of
increasing the power that our pupils should possess over their native language. By getting marks at school and
college for construing good Greek and Latin into bad English, our pupils systematically unlearn what they
may have been allowed to pick up from Milton and from Shakespeare.
I must acknowledge very large obligations to Professor Bain's treatise on "English Composition and
Rhetoric," and also to his English Grammar. I have not always been able to agree with Professor Bain as to
matters of taste; but I find it difficult to express my admiration for the systematic thoroughness and
suggestiveness of his book on Composition. In particular, Professor Bain's rule on the use of "that" and
"which" (see Rule 8) deserves to be better known.[2] The ambiguity produced by the confusion between these
two forms of the Relative is not a mere fiction of pedants; it is practically serious. Take, for instance, the
following sentence, which appeared lately in one of our ablest weekly periodicals: "There are a good many
Radical members in the House who cannot forgive the Prime Minister for being a Christian." Twenty years
hence, who is to say whether the meaning is "and they, i.e. all the Radical members in the House," or "there
are a good many Radical members of the House that cannot &c."? Professor Bain, apparently admitting no
exceptions to his useful rule, amends many sentences in a manner that seems to me intolerably harsh.
Therefore, while laying due stress on the utility of the rule, I have endeavoured to point out and explain the
exceptions.
The rules are stated as briefly as possible, and are intended not so much for use by themselves as for reference
while the pupil is working at the exercises. Consequently, there is no attempt to prove the rules by
accumulations of examples. The few examples that are given, are given not to prove, but to illustrate the rules.
The exercises are intended to be written out and revised, as exercises usually are; but they may also be used
for vivâ voce instruction. The books being shut, the pupils, with their written exercises before them, may be
questioned as to the reasons for the several alterations they have made. Experienced teachers will not require
any explanation of the arrangement or rather non-arrangement of the exercises. They have been purposely
mixed together unclassified to prevent the pupil from relying upon anything but his own common sense and
industry, to show him what is the fault in each case, and how it is to be amended. Besides references to the
rules, notes are attached to each sentence, so that the exercises ought not to present any difficulty to a
painstaking boy of twelve or thirteen, provided he has first been fairly trained in English grammar.
The "Continuous Extracts" present rather more difficulty, and are intended for boys somewhat older than
those for whom the Exercises are intended. The attempt to modernize, and clarify, so to speak, the style of
Burnet, Clarendon, and Bishop Butler,[3] may appear ambitious, and perhaps requires some explanation. My
object has, of course, not been to improve upon the style of these authors, but to show how their meaning
might be expressed more clearly in modern English. The charm of the style is necessarily lost, but if the loss
is recognized both by teacher and pupil, there is nothing, in my opinion, to counterbalance the obvious utility
of such exercises. Professor Bain speaks to the same effect:[4] "For an English exercise, the matter should in
some way or other be supplied, and the pupil disciplined in giving it expression. I know of no better method
than to prescribe passages containing good matter, but in some respects imperfectly worded, to be amended
according to the laws and the proprieties of style. Our older writers might be extensively, though not
exclusively, drawn upon for this purpose."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
To some of the friends whose help has been already acknowledged in "English Lessons for English People," I
am indebted for further help in revising these pages. I desire to express especial obligations to the Rev. J. H.
Lupton, late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, and Second Master of St. Paul's School, for copious and
valuable suggestions; also to several of my colleagues at the City of London School, among whom I must
mention in particular the Rev. A. R. Vardy, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
* * * * *
Before electrotyping the Fourth and Revised Edition, I wish to say one word as to the manner in which this
book has been used by my highest class, as a collection of Rules for reference in their construing lessons. In
construing, from Thucydides especially, I have found Rules 5, 30, 34, 36, 37, and 40a, of great use. The rules
about Metaphor and Climax have also been useful in correcting faults of taste in their Latin and Greek
compositions. I have hopes that, used in this way, this little book may be of service to the highest as well as to
the middle classes of our schools.
FOOTNOTES:
[1] Punctuation is fully discussed in most English Grammars, and is therefore referred to in this book only so
far as is necessary to point out the slovenly fault of trusting too much to punctuation, and too little to
arrangement.
[2] Before meeting with Professor Bain's rule, I had shown that the difference between the Relatives is
generally observed by Shakespeare. See "Shakespearian Grammar," paragraph 259.
[3] Sir Archibald Alison stands on a very different footing. The extracts from this author are intended to
exhibit the dangers of verbosity and exaggeration.
[4] "English Composition and Rhetoric," p. vii.
CONTENTS.
PAGE
INDEX OF RULES 11-13
RULES 14-40
SHORT EXERCISES 41-63
CONTINUOUS EXERCISES--CLARENDON 64-70
" " BURNET 70-73
" " BUTLER 74-75
" " SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON 76-78
INDEX OF RULES.
I. CLEARNESS AND FORCE.
WORDS.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
1. Use words in their proper sense.
2. Avoid exaggerations.
3. Avoid useless circumlocution and "fine writing."
4. Be careful in the use of "not ... and," "any," "but," "only," "not ... or," "that."
4 a. Be careful in the use of ambiguous words, e.g. "certain."
5. Be careful in the use of "he," "it," "they," "these," &c.
6. Report a speech in the First Person, where necessary to avoid ambiguity.
6 a. Use the Third Person where the exact words of the speaker are not intended to be given.
6 b. Omission of "that" in a speech in the Third Person.
7. When you use a Participle implying "when," "while," "though," or "that," show clearly by the context what
is implied.
8. When using the Relative Pronoun, use "who" or "which," if the meaning is "and he" or "and it," "for he" or
"for it." In other cases use "that," if euphony allows. Exceptions.
9. Do not use "and which" for "which."
10. Equivalents for the Relative: (a) Participle or Adjective; (b) Infinitive; (c) "Whereby," "whereto," &c.; (d)
"If a man;" (e) "And he," "and this," &c.; (f) "what;" (g) omission of Relative.
10 a'. Repeat the Antecedent before the Relative, where the non-repetition causes any ambiguity. See 38.
11. Use particular for general terms. Avoid abstract Nouns.
11 a. Avoid Verbal Nouns where Verbs can be used.
12. Use particular persons instead of a class.
13. Use metaphor instead of literal statement.
14. Do not confuse metaphor.
14 a. Do not mix metaphor with literal statement.
14 b. Do not use poetic metaphor to illustrate a prosaic subject.
ORDER OF WORDS IN A SENTENCE.
15. Emphatic words must stand in emphatic positions; i.e., for the most part, at the beginning or the end of the
sentence.
15 a. Unemphatic words must, as a rule, be kept from the end. Exceptions.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
15 b. An interrogation sometimes gives emphasis.
16. The Subject, if unusually emphatic, should often be transferred from the beginning of the sentence.
17. The Object is sometimes placed before the Verb for emphasis.
18. Where several words are emphatic, make it clear which is the most emphatic. Emphasis can sometimes be
given by adding an epithet, or an intensifying word.
19. Words should be as near as possible to the words with which they are grammatically connected.
20. Adverbs should be placed next to the words they are intended to qualify.
21. "Only"; the strict rule is that "only" should be placed before the word it affects.
22. When "not only" precedes "but also," see that each is followed by the same part of speech.
23. "At least," "always," and other adverbial adjuncts, sometimes produce ambiguity.
24. Nouns should be placed near the Nouns that they define.
25. Pronouns should follow the Nouns to which they refer, without the intervention of any other Noun.
26. Clauses that are grammatically connected should be kept as close together as possible. Avoid parentheses.
But see 55.
27. In conditional sentences, the antecedent or "if-clauses" must be kept distinct from the consequent clauses.
28. Dependent clauses preceded by "that" should be kept distinct from those that are independent.
29. Where there are several infinitives, those that are dependent on the same word must be kept distinct from
those that are not.
30. The principle of Suspense.
30 a. It is a violation of the principle of suspense to introduce unexpectedly at the end of a long sentence,
some short and unemphatic clause beginning with (a) "not," (b) "which."
31. Suspense must not be excessive.
32. In a sentence with "if," "when," "though," &c., put the "if-clause," antecedent, or protasis, first.
33. Suspense is gained by placing a Participle or Adjective, that qualifies the Subject, before the Subject.
34. Suspensive Conjunctions, e.g. "either," "not only," "on the one hand," &c., add clearness.
35. Repeat the Subject, where its omission would cause obscurity or ambiguity.
36. Repeat a Preposition after an intervening Conjunction, especially if a Verb and an Object also intervene.
37. Repeat Conjunctions, Auxiliary Verbs, and Pronominal Adjectives.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
37 a. Repeat Verbs after the Conjunctions "than," "as," &c.
38. Repeat the Subject, or some other emphatic word, or a summary of what has been said, if the sentence is
so long that it is difficult to keep the thread of meaning unbroken.
39. Clearness is increased, when the beginning of the sentence prepares the way for the middle, and the
middle for the end, the whole forming a kind of ascent. This ascent is called "climax."
40. When the thought is expected to ascend, but descends, feebleness, and sometimes confusion, is the result.
The descent is called "bathos."
40 a. A new construction should not be introduced unexpectedly.
41. Antithesis adds force and often clearness.
42. Epigram.
43. Let each sentence have one, and only one, principal subject of thought. Avoid heterogeneous sentences.
44. The connection between different sentences must be kept up by Adverbs used as Conjunctions, or by
means of some other connecting words at the beginning of the sentence.
45. The connection between two long sentences or paragraphs sometimes requires a short intervening
sentence showing the transition of thought.
II. BREVITY.
46. Metaphor is briefer than literal statement.
47. General terms are briefer, though less forcible, than particular terms.
47 a. A phrase may sometimes be expressed by a word.
48. Participles may often be used as brief (though sometimes ambiguous) equivalents of phrases containing
Conjunctions and Verbs.
49. Participles, Adjectives, Participial Adjectives, and Nouns may be used as equivalents for phrases
containing the Relative.
50. A statement may sometimes be briefly implied instead of being expressed at length.
51. Conjunctions may be omitted. Adverbs, e.g. "very," "so." Exaggerated epithets, e.g. "incalculable,"
"unprecedented."
51 a. The imperative may be used for "if &c."
52. Apposition may be used, so as to convert two sentences into one.
53. Condensation may be effected by not repeating (1) the common Subject of several Verbs; (2) the common
Object of several Verbs or Prepositions.
54. Tautology. Repeating what may be implied.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
55. Parenthesis maybe used with advantage to brevity. See 26.
56. Brevity often clashes with clearness. Let clearness be the first consideration.
CLEARNESS AND FORCE.
Numbers in brackets refer to the Rules.
WORDS.
*1. Use words in their proper sense.*
Write, not "His apparent guilt justified his friends in disowning him," but "his evident guilt." "Conscious" and
"aware," "unnatural" and "supernatural," "transpire" and "occur," "circumstance" and "event," "reverse" and
"converse," "eliminate" and "elicit," are often confused together.
This rule forbids the use of the same word in different senses. "It is in my power to refuse your request, and
since I have power to do this, I may lawfully do it." Here the second "power" is used for "authority."
This rule also forbids the slovenly use of "nice," "awfully," "delicious," "glorious," &c. See (2).
*2. Avoid exaggerations.*
"The boundless plains in the heart of the empire furnished inexhaustible supplies of corn, that would have
almost sufficed for twice the population."
Here "inexhaustible" is inconsistent with what follows. The words "unprecedented," "incalculable," "very,"
and "stupendous" are often used in the same loose way.
*3. Avoid useless circumlocution and "fine writing."*
"Her Majesty here partook of lunch." Write "lunched."
"Partook of" implies sharing, and is incorrect as well as lengthy.
So, do not use "apex" for "top," "species" for "kind," "individual" for "man," "assist" for "help," &c.
*4. Be careful how you use the following words: "not ... and," "any," "only," "not ... or," "that."*[5]
*And.* See below, "Or."
*Any.*--"I am not bound to receive any messenger that you send." Does this mean every, or a single? Use
"every" or "a single."
*Not.*--(1) "I do not intend to help you, because you are my enemy &c." ought to mean (2), "I intend not to
help you, and my reason for not helping you is, because you are my enemy." But it is often wrongly used to
mean (3), "I intend to help you, not because you are my enemy (but because you are poor, blind, &c.)." In the
latter case, not ought to be separated from intend. By distinctly marking the limits to which the influence of
not extends, the ambiguity may be removed.
*Only* is often used ambiguously for alone. "The rest help me to revenge myself; you only advise me to
wait." This ought to mean, "you only advise, instead of helping;" but in similar sentences "you only" is often
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
used for "you alone." But see 21.
*Or.*--When "or" is preceded by a negative, as "I do not want butter or honey," "or" ought not, strictly
speaking, to be used like "and," nor like "nor." The strict use of "not ... or" would be as follows:--
"You say you don't want both butter and honey--you want butter or honey; I, on the contrary, do not want
butter or honey--I want them both."
Practically, however, this meaning is so rare, that "I don't want butter or honey" is regularly used for "I want
neither butter nor honey." But where there is the slightest danger of ambiguity, it is desirable to use nor.
The same ambiguity attends "not ... and." "I do not see Thomas and John" is commonly used for "I see neither
Thomas nor John;" but it might mean, "I do not see them both--I see only one of them."
*That.*--The different uses of "that" produce much ambiguity, e.g. "I am so much surprised by this statement
that I am desirous of resigning, that I scarcely know what reply to make." Here it is impossible to tell, till one
has read past "resigning," whether the first "that" depends upon "so" or "statement." Write: "The statement
that I am desirous of resigning surprises me so much that I scarcely know &c."
*4 a. Be careful in the use of ambiguous words, e.g. "certain."*
"Certain" is often used for "some," as in "Independently of his earnings, he has a certain property," where the
meaning might be "unfailing."
Under this head may be mentioned the double use of words, such as "left" in the same form and sound, but
different in meaning. Even where there is no obscurity, the juxtaposition of the same word twice used in two
senses is inelegant, e.g. (Bain), "He turned to the left and left the room."
I have known the following slovenly sentence misunderstood: "Our object is that, with the aid of practice, we
may sometime arrive at the point where we think eloquence in its most praiseworthy form to lie." "To lie" has
been supposed to mean "to deceive."
*5. Be careful how you use "he," "it," "they," "these," &c.* (For "which" see 8.) The ambiguity arising from
the use of he applying to different persons is well known.
"He told his friend that if he did not feel better in half an hour he thought he had better return." See (6) for
remedy.
Much ambiguity is also caused by excessive use of such phrases as in this way, of this sort, &c.
"God, foreseeing the disorders of human nature, has given us certain passions and affections which arise from,
or whose objects are, these disorders. Of this sort are fear, resentment, compassion."
Repeat the noun: "Among these passions and affections are fear &c."
Two distinct uses of it may be noted. It, when referring to something that precedes, may be called
"retrospective;" but when to something that follows, "prospective." In "Avoid indiscriminate charity: it is a
crime," "it" is retrospective.[6] In "It is a crime to give indiscriminately," "it" is prospective.
The prospective "it," if productive of ambiguity, can often be omitted by using the infinitive as a subject: "To
give indiscriminately is a crime."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
*6. Report a speech in the First, not the Third Person, where necessary to avoid ambiguity.* Speeches in the
third person afford a particular, though very common case, of the general ambiguity mentioned in (5). Instead
of "He told his friend that if he did not feel better &c.," write "He said to his friend, 'If, I (or you) don't feel
better &c.'"
*6 a. Sometimes, where the writer cannot know the exact words, or where the exact words are unimportant, or
lengthy and uninteresting, the Third Person is preferable.* Thus, where Essex is asking Sir Robert Cecil that
Francis Bacon may be appointed Attorney-General, the dialogue is (as it almost always is in Lord Macaulay's
writings) in the First Person, except where it becomes tedious and uninteresting so as to require condensation,
and then it drops into the Third Person:
"Sir Robert had nothing to say but that he thought his own abilities equal to the place which he hoped to
obtain, and that his father's long services deserved such a mark of gratitude from the Queen."
*6 b. Omission of "that" in a speech reported in the Third Person.*--Even when a speech is reported in the
third person, "that" need not always be inserted before the dependent verb. Thus, instead of "He said that he
took it ill that his promises were not believed," we may write, "'He took it ill,' he said, 'that &c.'" This gives a
little more life, and sometimes more clearness also.
*7. When you use a Participle, as "walking," implying "when," "while," "though," "that," make it clear by the
context what is implied.*
"Republics, in the first instance, are never desired for their own sakes. I do not think they will finally be
desired at all, unaccompanied by courtly graces and good breeding."
Here there is a little doubt whether the meaning is "since they are, or, if they are, unaccompanied."
*That or when.*--"Men walking (that walk, or when they walk) on ice sometimes fall."
It is better to use "men walking" to mean "men when they walk." If the relative is meant, use "men that walk,"
instead of the participle.
(1) "While he was } Walking on { (1) the road, } he fell." (2) "Because he was } { (2) the ice, }
When the participle precedes the subject, it generally implies a cause: "Seeing this, he retired." Otherwise it
generally has its proper participial meaning, e.g. "He retired, keeping his face towards us." If there is any
ambiguity, write "on seeing,"--"at the same time, or while, keeping."
(1) "Though he was} {(1) he nevertheless stood } { his ground." (2) "Since he was } Struck with terror, {(2)
he rapidly retreated." (3) "If he is } {(3) he will soon retreat."
*8. When using the Relative Pronoun, use "who" and "which" where the meaning is "and he, it, &c.," "for he,
it, &c." In other cases use "that," if euphony allows.*
"I heard this from the inspector, who (and he) heard it from the guard that travelled with the train."
"Fetch me (all) the books that lie on the table, and also the pamphlets, which (and these) you will find on the
floor."
An adherence to this rule would remove much ambiguity. Thus: "There was a public-house next door, which
was a great nuisance," means "and this (i.e. the fact of its being next door) was a great nuisance;" whereas that
would have meant "Next door was a public-house that (i.e. the public-house) was a great nuisance." *"Who,"
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
"which," &c. introduce a new fact about the antecedent, whereas "that" introduces something without which
the antecedent is incomplete or undefined.* Thus, in the first example above, "inspector" is complete in itself,
and "who" introduces a new fact about him; "guard" is incomplete, and requires "that travelled with the train"
to complete the meaning.
It is not, and cannot be, maintained that this rule, though observed in Elizabethan English, is observed by our
best modern authors. (Probably a general impression that "that" cannot be used to refer to persons has assisted
"who" in supplanting "that" as a relative.) But the convenience of the rule is so great that beginners in
composition may with advantage adhere to the rule. The following are some of the cases where who and
which are mostly used, contrary to the rule, instead of that.
*Exceptions:*--
(a) When the antecedent is defined, e.g. by a possessive case, modern English uses who instead of that. It is
rare, though it would be useful,[7] to say "His English friends that had not seen him" for "the English friends,
or those of his English friends, that had not seen him."
(b) That sounds ill when separated from its verb and from its antecedents, and emphasized by isolation:
"There are many persons that, though unscrupulous, are commonly good-tempered, and that, if not strongly
incited by self-interest, are ready for the most part to think of the interest of their neighbours." Shakespeare
frequently uses who after that when the relative is repeated. See "Shakespearian Grammar," par. 260.
(c) If the antecedent is qualified by that, the relative must not be that. Besides other considerations, the
repetition is disagreeable. Addison ridicules such language as "That remark that I made yesterday is not that
that I said that I regretted that I had made."
(d) That cannot be preceded by a preposition, and hence throws the preposition to the end. "This is the rule
that I adhere to." This is perfectly good English, though sometimes unnecessarily avoided. But, with some
prepositions, the construction is harsh and objectionable, e.g. "This is the mark that I jumped beyond," "Such
were the prejudices that he rose above." The reason is that some of these disyllabic prepositions are used as
adverbs, and, when separated from their nouns, give one the impression that they are used as adverbs.
(e) After pronominal adjectives used for personal pronouns, modern English prefers who. "There are many,
others, several, those, who can testify &c."
(f) After that used as a conjunction there is sometimes a dislike to use that as a relative. See (c).
*9. Do not use redundant "and" before "which."[8]*
"I gave him a very interesting book for a present, and which cost me five shillings."
In short sentences the absurdity is evident, but in long sentences it is less evident, and very common.
"A petition was presented for rescinding that portion of the bye-laws which permits application of public
money to support sectarian schools over which ratepayers have no control, this being a violation of the
principle of civil and religious liberty, and which the memorialists believe would provoke a determined and
conscientious resistance."
Here which ought grammatically to refer to "portion" or "schools." But it seems intended to refer to
"violation." Omit "and," or repeat "a violation" before "which," or turn the sentence otherwise.
*10. Equivalents for Relative.*
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
*(a) Participle.*--"Men thirsting (for 'men that thirst') for revenge are not indifferent to plunder." The
objection to the participle is that here, as often, it creates a little ambiguity. The above sentence may mean,
"men, when they thirst," or "though they thirst," as well as "men that thirst." Often however there is no
ambiguity: "I have documents proving this conclusively."
*(b) Infinitive.*--Instead of "He was the first that entered" you can write "to enter;" for "He is not a man who
will act dishonestly," "to act." This equivalent cannot often be used.
*(c) Whereby, wherein, &c.,* can sometimes be used for "by which," "in which," so as to avoid a harsh
repetition of "which." "The means whereby this may be effected." But this use is somewhat antiquated.
*(d) If.*--"The man that does not care for music is to be pitied" can be written (though not so forcibly), "If a
man does not care for music, he is to be pitied." It is in long sentences that this equivalent will be found most
useful.
*(e) And this.*--"He did his best, which was all that could be expected," can be written, "and this was all that,
&c."
*(f) What.*--"Let me repeat that which[9] you ought to know, that that which is worth doing is worth doing
well." "Let me repeat, what you ought to know, that what is worth doing is worth doing well."
*(g) Omission of Relative.*--It is sometimes thought ungrammatical to omit the relative, as in "The man (that)
you speak of." On the contrary, that when an object (not when a subject) may be omitted, wherever the
antecedent and the subject of the relative sentence are brought into juxtaposition by the omission.
*10 a'. Repeat the Antecedent in some new form, where there is any ambiguity.* This is particularly useful
after a negative: "He said that he would not even hear me, which I confess I had expected." Here the meaning
may be, "I had expected that he would," or "that he would not, hear me." Write, "a refusal, or, a favour, that I
confess I had expected." See (38).
*11. Use particular for general terms.*--This is a most important rule. Instead of "I have neither the
necessaries of life nor the means of procuring them," write (if you can with truth), "I have not a crust of bread,
nor a penny to buy one."
CAUTION.--There is a danger in this use. The meaning is vividly expressed but sometimes may be
exaggerated or imperfect. Crust of bread may be an exaggeration; on the other hand, if the speaker is destitute
not only of bread, but also of shelter and clothing, then crust of bread is an imperfect expression of the
meaning.
In philosophy and science, where the language ought very often to be inclusive and brief, general and not
particular terms must be used.
*11 a. Avoid Verbal Nouns where Verbs can be used instead.* The disadvantage of the use of Verbal Nouns
is this, that, unless they are immediately preceded by prepositions, they are sometimes liable to be confounded
with participles. The following is an instance of an excessive use of Verbal Nouns:
"The pretended confession of the secretary was only collusion to lay the jealousies of the king's favouring
popery, which still hung upon him, notwithstanding his writing on the Revelation, and affecting to enter on all
occasions into controversy, asserting in particular that the Pope was Antichrist."
Write "notwithstanding that he wrote and affected &c."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
*12. Use a particular Person instead of a class.*
"What is the splendour of the greatest monarch compared with the beauty of a flower?" "What is the
splendour of Solomon compared with the beauty of a daisy?"
Under this head may come the forcible use of Noun for Adjective: "This fortress is weakness itself."
An excess of this use is lengthy and pedantically bombastic, e.g., the following paraphrase for "in every
British colony:"--"under Indian palm-groves, amid Australian gum-trees, in the shadow of African mimosas,
and beneath Canadian pines."
*13. Use Metaphor instead of literal statement.*
"The ship ploughs the sea" is clearer than "the ship cleaves the sea," and shorter than "the ship cleaves the sea
as a plough cleaves the land."
Of course there are some subjects for which Metaphor should not be used. See (14 a) and (14 b).
*14. Do not confuse Metaphor.*
"In a moment the thunderbolt was upon them, deluging their country with invaders."
The following is attributed to Sir Boyle Roche: "Mr. Speaker, I smell a rat, I see him brewing in the air; but,
mark me, I shall yet nip him in the bud."
Some words, once metaphorical, have ceased to be so regarded. Hence many good writers say "under these
circumstances" instead of "in these circumstances."
An excessive regard for disused metaphor savours of pedantry: disregard is inelegant. Write, not,
"unparalleled complications," but "unprecedented complications;" and "he threw light on obscurities," instead
of "he unravelled obscurities."
*14 a. Do not introduce literal statement immediately after Metaphor.*
"He was the father of Chemistry, and brother to the Earl of Cork."
"He was a very thunderbolt of war, And was lieutenant to the Earl of Mar."
*14 b. Do not use poetic metaphor to illustrate a prosaic subject.* Thus, we may say "a poet soars," or even,
though rarely, "a nation soars to greatness," but you could not say "Consols soared to 94-1/2." Even
commonplace subjects may be illustrated by metaphor: for it is a metaphor, and quite unobjectionable, to say
"Consols mounted, or jumped to 94-1/2." But commonplace subjects must be illustrated by metaphor that is
commonplace.
ORDER OF WORDS IN A SENTENCE.
*15. Emphatic words must stand in emphatic positions; i.e. for the most part, at the beginning or at the end of
the sentence.* This rule occasionally supersedes the common rules about position. Thus, the place for an
adverb, as a rule, should be between the subject and verb: "He quickly left the room;" but if quickly is to be
emphatic, it must come at the beginning or end, as in "I told him to leave the room slowly, but he left quickly."
Adjectives, in clauses beginning with "if" and "though," often come at the beginning for emphasis: "Insolent
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
though he was, he was silenced at last."
*15 a. Unemphatic words must, as a rule, be kept from the end of the sentence.* It is a common fault to break
this rule by placing a short and unemphatic predicate at the end of a long sentence.
"To know some Latin, even if it be nothing but a few Latin roots, is useful." Write, "It is useful, &c."
So "the evidence proves how kind to his inferiors he is."
Often, where an adjective or auxiliary verb comes at the end, the addition of an emphatic adverb justifies the
position, e.g. above, "is very useful," "he has invariably been."
A short "chippy" ending, even though emphatic, is to be avoided. It is abrupt and unrhythmical, e.g. "The
soldier, transfixed with the spear, writhed." We want a longer ending, "fell writhing to the ground," or,
"writhed in the agonies of death." A "chippy" ending is common in bad construing from Virgil.
*Exceptions.*--Prepositions and pronouns attached to emphatic words need not be moved from the end; e.g.
"He does no harm that I hear of." "Bear witness how I loved him."
*N.B. In all styles, especially in letter-writing, a final emphasis must not be so frequent as to become
obtrusive and monotonous.*
*15 b. An interrogation sometimes gives emphasis.* "No one can doubt that the prisoner, had he been really
guilty, would have shown some signs of remorse," is not so emphatic as "Who can doubt, Is it possible to
doubt, &c.?"
Contrast "No one ever names Wentworth without thinking of &c." with "But Wentworth,--who ever names
him without thinking of those harsh dark features, ennobled by their expression into more than the majesty of
an antique Jupiter?"
*16. The subject, if unusually emphatic, should often be removed from the beginning of the sentence.* The
beginning of the sentence is an emphatic position, though mostly not so emphatic as the end. Therefore the
principal subject of a sentence, being emphatic, and being wanted early in the sentence to tell us what the
sentence is about, comes as a rule, at or near the beginning: "Thomas built this house."
Hence, since the beginning is the usual place for the subject, if we want to emphasize "Thomas" unusually,
we must remove "Thomas" from the beginning: "This house was built by Thomas," or "It was Thomas that
built this house."
Thus, the emphasis on "conqueror" is not quite so strong in "A mere conqueror ought not to obtain from us the
reverence that is due to the great benefactors of mankind," as in "We ought not to bestow the reverence that is
due to the great benefactors of mankind, upon a mere conqueror." Considerable, but less emphasis and greater
smoothness (19) will be obtained by writing the sentence thus: "We ought not to bestow upon a mere
conqueror &c."
Where the same subject stands first in several consecutive sentences, it rises in emphasis, and need not be
removed from the beginning, even though unusual emphasis be required:
"The captain was the life and soul of the expedition. He first pointed out the possibility of advancing; he
warned them of the approaching scarcity of provisions; he showed how they might replenish their exhausted
stock &c."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
*17. The object is sometimes placed before the verb for emphasis.* This is most common in antithesis. "Jesus
I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?" "Some he imprisoned, others he put to death."
Even where there is no antithesis the inversion is not uncommon:
"Military courage, the boast of the sottish German, of the frivolous and prating Frenchman, of the romantic
and arrogant Spaniard, he neither possesses nor values."
This inversion sometimes creates ambiguity in poetry, e.g. "The son the father slew," and must be sparingly
used in prose.
Sometimes the position of a word may be considered appropriate by some, and inappropriate by others,
according to different interpretations of the sentence. Take as an example, "Early in the morning the nobles
and gentlemen who attended on the king assembled in the great hall of the castle; and here they began to talk
of what a dreadful storm it had been the night before. But Macbeth could scarcely understand what they said,
for he was thinking of something worse." The last sentence has been amended by Professor Bain into "What
they said, Macbeth could scarcely understand." But there appears to be an antithesis between the guiltless
nobles who can think about the weather, and the guilty Macbeth who cannot. Hence, "what they said" ought
not, and "Macbeth" ought, to be emphasized: and therefore "Macbeth" ought to be retained at the beginning of
the sentence.
The same author alters, "The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with him, but his invention
remains yet unrivalled," into "Virgil has justly contested with him the praise of judgment, but no one has yet
rivalled his invention"--an alteration which does not seem to emphasize sufficiently the antithesis between
what had been 'contested,' on the one hand, and what remained as yet 'unrivalled' on the other.
More judiciously Professor Bain alters, "He that tells a lie is not sensible how great a task he undertakes; for
he must be forced to invent twenty more to maintain one," into "for, to maintain one, he must invent twenty
more," putting the emphatic words in their emphatic place, at the end.
*18. Where several words are emphatic, make it clear which is the most emphatic.* Thus, in "The state was
made, under the pretence of serving it, in reality the prize of their contention to each of these opposite
parties," it is unpleasantly doubtful whether the writer means (1) state or (2) parties to be emphatic.
If (1), "As for the state, these two parties, under the pretence of serving it, converted it into a prize for their
contention." If (2), write, "Though served in profession, the state was in reality converted into a prize for their
contention by these two parties." In (1) parties is subordinated, in (2) state.
Sometimes the addition of some intensifying word serves to emphasize. Thus, instead of "To effect this they
used all devices," we can write "To effect this they used every conceivable device." So, if we want to
emphasize fidelity in "The business will task your skill and fidelity," we can write "Not only your skill but
also your fidelity." This, however, sometimes leads to exaggerations. See (2).
Sometimes antithesis gives emphasis, as in "You do not know this, but you shall know it." Where antithesis
cannot be used, the emphasis must be expressed by turning the sentence, as "I will make you know it," or by
some addition, as "You shall hereafter know it."
*19. Words should be as near as possible to the words with which they are grammatically connected.* See
Paragraphs 20 to 29. For exceptions see 30.
*20. Adverbs should be placed next to the words they are intended to affect.* When unemphatic, adverbs
come between the subject and the verb, or, if the tense is compound, between the parts of the compound tense:
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
"He quickly left the room;" "He has quickly left the room;" but, when emphatic, after the verb: "He left, or has
left, the room quickly."[10] When such a sentence as the latter is followed by a present participle, there arises
ambiguity. "I told him to go slowly, but he left the room quickly, dropping the purse on the floor." Does
quickly here modify left or dropping? The remedy[11] is, to give the adverb its unemphatic place, "He quickly
left the room, dropping &c.," or else to avoid the participle, thus: "He quickly dropped the purse and left the
room," or "He dropped the purse and quickly left the room."
*21. "Only" requires careful use. The strict[12] rule is, that "only" should be placed before the word affected
by it.*
The following is ambiguous:
"The heavens are not open to the faithful only at intervals."
The best rule is to avoid placing "only" between two emphatic words, and to avoid using "only" where "alone"
can be used instead.
In strictness perhaps the three following sentences:
(1) He only beat three,
(2) He beat only three,
(3) He beat three only, ought to be explained, severally, thus:
(1) He did no more than beat, did not kill, three.
(2) He beat no more than three.
(3) He beat three, and that was all he did. (Here only modifies the whole of the sentence and depreciates the
action.)
But the best authors sometimes transpose the word. "He only lived" ought to mean "he did not die or make
any great sacrifice;" but "He only lived but till he was a man" (Macbeth, v. 8. 40) means "He lived only till he
was a man." Compare also, "Who only hath immortality."
Only at the beginning of a statement = but. "I don't like to importune you, only I know you'll forgive me."
Before an imperative it diminishes the favour asked: "Only listen to me." This use of only is mostly confined
to letters.
Very often, only at the beginning of a sentence is used for alone: "Only ten came," "Only Cæsar approved."
Alone is less ambiguous. The ambiguity of only is illustrated by such a sentence as, "Don't hesitate to bring a
few friends of yours to shoot on my estate at any time. Only five (fifteen) came yesterday," which might
mean, "I don't mind a few; only don't bring so many as fifteen;" or else "Don't hesitate to bring a few more; no
more than five came yesterday." In conversation, ambiguity is prevented by emphasis; but in a letter, only thus
used might cause unfortunate mistakes. Write "Yesterday only five came," if you mean "no more than five."
*22. When "not only" precedes "but also," see that each is followed by the same part of speech.*
"He not only gave me advice but also help" is wrong. Write "He gave me, not only advice, but also help." On
the other hand, "He not only gave me a grammar, but also lent me a dictionary," is right. Take an instance.
"He spoke not only forcibly but also tastefully (adverbs), and this too, not only before a small audience, but
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
also in (prepositions) a large public meeting, and his speeches were not only successful, but also (adjective)
worthy of success."
*23. "At least," "always," and other adverbial adjuncts, sometimes produce ambiguity.*
"I think you will find my Latin exercise, at all events, as good as my cousin's." Does this mean (1) "my Latin
exercise, though not perhaps my other exercises;" or (2), "Though not very good, yet, at all events, as good as
my cousin's"? Write for (1), "My Latin exercise, at all events, you will find &c." and for (2), "I think you will
find my Latin exercise as good as my cousin's, at all events."
The remedy is to avoid placing "at all events" between two emphatic words.
As an example of the misplacing of an adverbial adjunct, take "From abroad he received most favourable
reports, but in the City he heard that a panic had broken out on the Exchange, and that the funds were fast
falling." This ought to mean that the "hearing," and not (as is intended) that the "breaking out of the panic,"
took place in the City.
In practice, an adverb is often used to qualify a remote word, where the latter is more emphatic than any
nearer word. This is very common when the Adverbial Adjunct is placed in an emphatic position at the
beginning of the sentence: "On this very spot our guide declared that Claverhouse had fallen."
*24. Nouns should be placed near the nouns that they define.* In the very common sentence "The death is
announced of Mr. John Smith, an author whose works &c.," the transposition is probably made from a feeling
that, if we write "The death of Mr. John Smith is announced," we shall be obliged to begin a new sentence,
"He was an author whose works &c." But the difficulty can be removed by writing "We regret to announce,
or, we are informed of, the death of Mr. John Smith, an author, &c."
*25. Pronouns should follow the nouns to which they refer without the intervention of another noun.* Avoid,
"John Smith, the son of Thomas Smith, who gave me this book," unless Thomas Smith is the antecedent of
who. Avoid also "John supplied Thomas with money: he (John) was very well off."
When, however, one of two preceding nouns is decidedly superior to the other in emphasis, the more emphatic
may be presumed to be the noun referred to by the pronoun, even though the noun of inferior emphasis
intervenes. Thus: "At this moment the colonel came up, and took the place of the wounded general. He gave
orders to halt." Here he would naturally refer to colonel, though general intervenes. A conjunction will often
show that a pronoun refers to the subject of the preceding sentence, and not to another intervening noun. "The
sentinel at once took aim at the approaching soldier, and fired. He then retreated to give the alarm."
It is better to adhere, in most cases, to Rule 25, which may be called (Bain) the Rule of Proximity. The Rule
of Emphasis, of which an instance was given in the last paragraph, is sometimes misleading. A distinction
might be drawn by punctuating thus:
"David the father of Solomon, who slew Goliath." "David, the father of Solomon who built the Temple." But
the propriety of omitting a comma in each case is questionable, and it is better to write so as not to be at the
mercy of commas.
*26. Clauses that are grammatically connected should be kept as close together as possible.* (But see 55.) The
introduction of parentheses violating this rule often produced serious ambiguity. Thus, in the following: "The
result of these observations appears to be in opposition to the view now generally received in this country, that
in muscular effort the substance of the muscle itself undergoes disintegration." Here it is difficult to tell
whether the theory of "disintegration" is (1) "the result," or, as the absence of a comma after "be" would
indicate, (2) "in opposition to the result of these observations." If (1) is intended, add "and to prove" after
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
"country;" if (2), insert "which is" after "country."
There is an excessive complication in the following:--"It cannot, at all events, if the consideration demanded
by a subject of such importance from any one professing to be a philosopher, be given, be denied that &c."
Where a speaker feels that his hearers have forgotten the connection of the beginning of the sentence, he
should repeat what he has said; e.g. after the long parenthesis in the last sentence he should recommence, "it
cannot, I say, be denied." In writing, however, this licence must be sparingly used.
A short parenthesis, or modifying clause, will not interfere with clearness, especially if antithesis he used, so
as to show the connection between the different parts of the sentence, e.g. "A modern newspaper statement,
though probably true, would be laughed at if quoted in a book as testimony; but the letter of a court gossip is
thought good historical evidence if written some centuries ago." Here, to place "though probably true" at the
beginning of the sentence would not add clearness, and would impair the emphasis of the contrast between "a
modern newspaper statement" and "the letter of a court gossip."
*27. In conditional sentences, the antecedent clauses must be kept distinct from the consequent
clauses.*--There is ambiguity in "The lesson intended to be taught by these manoeuvres will be lost, if the
plan of operations is laid down too definitely beforehand, and the affair degenerates into a mere review."
Begin, in any case, with the antecedent, "If the plan," &c. Next write, according to the meaning: (1) "If the
plan is laid down, and the affair degenerates &c., then the lesson will be lost;" or (2) " ... then the lesson ...
will be lost, and the affair degenerates into a mere review."
*28. Dependent clauses preceded by "that" should be kept distinct from those that are independent.*
Take as an example:
(1) "He replied that he wished to help them, and intended to make preparations accordingly."
This ought not to be used (though it sometimes is, for shortness) to mean:
(2) "He replied ..., and he intended."
In (1), "intended," having no subject, must be supposed to be connected with the nearest preceding verb, in the
same mood and tense, that has a subject, i.e. "wished." It follows that (1) is a condensation of:
(3) "He replied that he wished ..., and that he intended."
(2), though theoretically free from ambiguity, is practically ambiguous, owing to a loose habit of repeating the
subject unnecessarily. It would be better to insert a conjunctional word or a full stop between the two
statements. Thus:
(4) "He replied that he wished to help them, and indeed he intended," &c., or "He replied, &c. He intended,
&c."
Where there is any danger of ambiguity, use (3) or (4) in preference to (1) or (2).
*29. When there are several infinitives, those that are dependent on the same word must be kept distinct from
those that are not.*
"He said that he wished to take his friend with him to visit the capital and to study medicine." Here it is
doubtful whether the meaning is--
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
"He said that he wished to take his friend with him,
(1) and also to visit the capital and study medicine," or
(2) "that his friend might visit the capital and might also study medicine," or
(3) "on a visit to the capital, and that he also wished to study medicine."
From the three different versions it will be perceived that this ambiguity must be met (a) by using "that" for
"to," which allows us to repeat an auxiliary verb [e.g. "might" in (2)], and (b) by inserting conjunctions. As to
insertions of conjunctions, see (37).
"In order to," and "for the purpose of," can be used to distinguish (wherever there is any ambiguity) between
an infinitive that expresses a purpose, and an infinitive that does not, e.g. "He told his servant to call upon his
friend, to (in order to) give him information about the trains, and not to leave him till he started."
*30. The principle of suspense.* Write your sentence in such a way that, until he has come to the full stop, the
reader may feel the sentence to be incomplete. In other words, keep your reader in suspense. Suspense is
caused (1) by placing the "if-clause" first, and not last, in a conditional sentence; (2) by placing participles
before the words they qualify; (3) by using suspensive conjunctions, e.g. not only, either, partly, on the one
hand, in the first place, &c.
The following is an example of an unsuspended sentence. The sense draggles, and it is difficult to keep up
one's attention.
"Mr. Pym was looked upon as the man of greatest experience in parliaments, | where he had served very long,
| and was always a man of business, | being an officer in the Exchequer, | and of a good reputation generally, |
though known to be inclined to the Puritan party; yet not of those furious resolutions (Mod. Eng. so furiously
resolved) against the Church as the other leading men were, | and wholly devoted to the Earl of Bedford,--who
had nothing of that spirit."
The foregoing sentence might have ended at any one of the eight points marked above. When suspended it
becomes:--
"Mr. Pym, owing to his long service in Parliament in the Exchequer, was esteemed above all others for his
Parliamentary experience and for his knowledge of business. He had also a good reputation generally; for,
though openly favouring the Puritan party, he was closely devoted to the Earl of Bedford, and, like the Earl,
had none of the fanatical spirit manifested against the Church by the other leading men."
*30 a. It is a violation of the principle of Suspense to introduce unexpectedly, at the end of a long sentence,
some short and unemphatic clause beginning with (a) " ... not" or (b) " ... which."*
(a) "This reform has already been highly beneficial to all classes of our countrymen, and will, I am persuaded,
encourage among us industry, self-dependence, and frugality, and not, as some say, wastefulness."
Write "not, as some say, wastefulness, but industry, self-dependence, and frugality."
(b) "After a long and tedious journey, the last part of which was a little dangerous owing to the state of the
roads, we arrived safely at York, which is a fine old town."
*Exception.*--When the short final clause is intended to be unexpectedly unemphatic, it comes in
appropriately, with something of the sting of an epigram. See (42). Thus:
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
19


===== PAGE 20 =====
"The old miser said that he should have been delighted to give the poor fellow a shilling, but most
unfortunately he had left his purse at home--a habit of his."
Suspense naturally throws increased emphasis on the words for which we are waiting, i.e. on the end of the
sentence. It has been pointed out above that *a monotony of final emphasis is objectionable, especially in
letter writing and conversation*.
*31. Suspense must not be excessive.* Excess of suspense is a common fault in boys translating from Latin.
"Themistocles, having secured the safety of Greece, the Persian fleet being now destroyed, when he had
unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the Greeks to break down the bridge across the Hellespont, hearing that
Xerxes was in full flight, and thinking that it might be profitable to secure the friendship of the king, wrote as
follows to him." The more English idiom is: "When Themistocles had secured the safety of Greece by the
destruction of the Persian fleet, he made an unsuccessful attempt to persuade the Greeks to break down the
bridge across the Hellespont. Soon afterwards, hearing &c."
A long suspense that would be intolerable in prose is tolerable in the introduction to a poem. See the long
interval at the beginning of Paradise Lost between "Of man's first disobedience" and "Sing, heavenly Muse."
Compare also the beginning of Paradise Lost, Book II.:
"High on a throne of royal state, which far Outshone the wealth of Ormuz and of Ind, Or where the gorgeous
East with richest hand Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold-- Satan exalted sat."
with the opening of Keats' Hyperion:
"Deep in the shady sadness of a vale, Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn, Far from the fiery noon
and eve's one star-- Sat grey-haired Saturn, quiet as a stone."
*32. In a long conditional sentence put the "if-clause," antecedent, or protasis, first.*
Everyone will see the flatness of "Revenge thy father's most unnatural murder, if thou didst ever love him," as
compared with the suspense that forces an expression of agony from Hamlet in--
"Ghost. If thou didst ever thy dear father love-- Hamlet. O, God! Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural
murder."
The effect is sometimes almost ludicrous when the consequent is long and complicated, and when it precedes
the antecedent or "if-clause." "I should be delighted to introduce you to my friends, and to show you the
objects of interest in our city, and the beautiful scenery in the neighbourhood, if you were here." Where the
"if-clause" comes last, it ought to be very emphatic: "if you were only here."
The introduction of a clause with "if" or "though" in the middle of a sentence may often cause ambiguity,
especially when a great part of the sentence depends on "that:" "His enemies answered that, for the sake of
preserving the public peace, they would keep quiet for the present, though he declared that cowardice was the
motive of the delay, and that for this reason they would put off the trial to a more convenient season." See
(27).
*33. Suspense[13] is gained by placing a Participle or Adjective that qualifies the Subject, before the
Subject.*
"Deserted by his friends, he was forced to have recourse to those that had been his enemies." Here, if we
write, "He, deserted by his friends, was forced &c.," he is unduly emphasized; and if we write, "He was forced
to have recourse to his enemies, having been deserted by his friends," the effect is very flat.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
20


===== PAGE 21 =====
Of course we might sometimes write "He was deserted and forced &c." But this cannot be done where the
"desertion" is to be not stated but implied.
Often, when a participle qualifying the subject is introduced late in the sentence, it causes positive ambiguity:
"With this small force the general determined to attack the foe, flushed with recent victory and rendered
negligent by success."
An excessive use of the suspensive participle is French and objectionable: e.g. "Careless by nature, and too
much engaged with business to think of the morrow, spoiled by a long-established liberty and a fabulous
prosperity, having for many generations forgotten the scourge of war, we allow ourselves to drift on without
taking heed of the signs of the times." The remedy is to convert the participle into a verb depending on a
conjunction: "Because we are by nature careless, &c.;" or to convert the participle into a verb co-ordinate with
the principal verb, e.g. "We are by nature careless, &c., and therefore we allow ourselves, &c."
*34. Suspensive Conjunctions, e.g. "either," "not only," "on the one hand," add clearness.*--Take the
following sentence:--"You must take this extremely perilous course, in which success is uncertain, and failure
disgraceful, as well as ruinous, or else the liberty of your country is endangered." Here, the meaning is liable
to be misunderstood, till the reader has gone half through the sentence. Write "Either you must," &c., and the
reader is, from the first, prepared for an alternative. Other suspensive conjunctions or phrases are partly, for
our part; in the first place; it is true; doubtless; of course; though; on the one hand.
*35. Repeat the Subject when the omission would cause ambiguity or obscurity.*--The omission is
particularly likely to cause obscurity after a Relative standing as Subject:--
"He professes to be helping the nation, which in reality is suffering from his flattery, and (he? or it?) will not
permit anyone else to give it advice."
The Relative should be repeated when it is the Subject of several Verbs. "All the pleasing illusions which
made power gentle and obedience liberal, which harmonized the different shades of life, and which, by a bland
assimilation, incorporated into politics the sentiments that beautify and soften private society, are to be
dissolved by this new conquering empire of light and reason."
*36. Repeat a Preposition after an intervening Conjunction, especially if a Verb and an Object also intervene.*
"He forgets the gratitude that he owes to those that helped all his companions when he was poor and
uninfluential, and (to) John Smith in particular." Here, omit to, and the meaning may be "that helped all his
companions, and John Smith in particular." The intervention of the verb and object, "helped" and
"companions," causes this ambiguity.
*37. When there are several Verbs at some distance from a Conjunction on which they depend, repeat the
Conjunction.*[14]
"When we look back upon the havoc that two hundred years have made in the ranks of our national
authors--and, above all, (when) we refer their rapid disappearance to the quick succession of new
competitors--we cannot help being dismayed at the prospect that lies before the writers of the present day."
Here omit "when," and we at once substitute a parenthetical statement for what is really a subordinate clause.
In reporting a speech or opinion, "that" must be continually repeated, to avoid the danger of confusing what
the writer says with what others say.
"We might say that the Cæsars did not persecute the Christians; (that) they only punished men who were
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
21


===== PAGE 22 =====
charged, rightly or wrongly, with burning Rome, and committing the foulest abominations in secret
assemblies; and (that) the refusal to throw frankincense on the altar of Jupiter was not the crime, but only
evidence of the crime." But see (6 b).
*37 a. Repeat Verbs after the conjunctions "than," "as," &c.*
"I think he likes me better than you;" i.e. either "than you like me," or "he likes you."
"Cardinal Richelieu hated Buckingham as sincerely as did the Spaniard Olivares." Omit "did," and you cause
ambiguity.
*38. If the sentence is so long that it is difficult to keep the thread of meaning unbroken, repeat the subject, or
some other emphatic word, or a summary of what has been said.*
"Gold and cotton, banks and railways, crowded ports, and populous cities--these are not the elements that
constitute a great nation."
This repetition (though useful and, when used in moderation, not unpleasant) is more common with speakers
than with writers, and with slovenly speakers than with good speakers.
"The country is in such a condition, that if we delay longer some fair measure of reform, sufficient at least to
satisfy the more moderate, and much more, if we refuse all reform whatsoever--I say, if we adopt so unwise a
policy, the country is in such a condition that we may precipitate a revolution."
Where the relative is either implied (in a participle) or repeated, the antecedent must often be repeated also. In
the following sentence we have the Subject repeated not only in the final summary, but also as the
antecedent:--
"But if there were, in any part of the world, a national church regarded as heretical by four-fifths of the nation
committed to its care; a church established and maintained by the sword; a church producing twice as many
riots as conversions; a church which, though possessing great wealth and power, and though long backed by
persecuting laws, had, in the course of many generations, been found unable to propagate its doctrines, and
barely able to maintain its ground; a church so odious that fraud and violence, when used against its clear
rights of property, were generally regarded as fair play; a church whose ministers were preaching to desolate
walls, and with difficulty obtaining their lawful subsistence by the help of bayonets,--such a church, on our
principles, could not, we must own, be defended."
*39. It is a help to clearness, when the first part of the sentence prepares the way for the middle and the
middle for the end, in a kind of ascent. This ascent is called "climax."*
In the following there are two climaxes, each of which has three terms:--
"To gossip(a) is a fault(b); to libel(a'), a crime(b'); to slander(a''), a sin(b'')."
In the following, there are several climaxes, and note how they contribute to the clearness of a long
sentence:--
"Man, working, has contrived(a) the Atlantic Cable, but I declare that it astonishes(b) me far more to think
that for his mere amusement(c), that to entertain a mere idle hour(c'), he has created(a') 'Othello' and 'Lear,'
and I am more than astonished, I am awe-struck(b'), at that inexplicable elasticity of his nature which enables
him, instead of turning away(d) from calamity and grief(e), or instead of merely defying(d') them, actually to
make them the material of his amusement(d''), and to draw from the wildest agonies of the human spirit(e') a
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
22


===== PAGE 23 =====
pleasure which is not only not cruel(f), but is in the highest degree pure and ennobling(f')."
The neglect of climax produces an abruptness that interferes with the even flow of thought. Thus, if Pope, in
his ironical address to mankind, had written--
"Go, wondrous creature, mount where science guides; Go, measure earth, weigh air, and state the tides; Go,
teach Eternal Wisdom how to rule"--
the ascent would have been too rapid. The transition from earth to heaven, and from investigating to
governing, is prepared by the intervening climax--
"Instruct the planets in what orbs to run; Correct old Time, and regulate the Sun; Go, soar with Plato to th'
empyreal sphere, To the first good, first perfect, and first fair."
*40. When the thought is expected to ascend and yet descends, feebleness and sometimes confusion is the
result. The descent is called "bathos."*
"What pen can describe the tears, the lamentations, the agonies, the animated remonstrances of the
unfortunate prisoners?"
"She was a woman of many accomplishments and virtues, graceful in her movements, winning in her address,
a kind friend, a faithful and loving wife, a most affectionate mother, and she played beautifully on the
pianoforte."
INTENTIONAL BATHOS has a humorous incongruity and abruptness that is sometimes forcible. For
example, after the climax ending with the line--
"Go, teach Eternal Wisdom how to rule,"
Pope adds--
"Then drop into thyself, and be a fool."
*40 a. A new construction should not be introduced without cause.*--A sudden and apparently unnecessary
change of construction causes awkwardness and roughness at least, and sometimes breaks the flow of the
sentence so seriously as to cause perplexity. Thus, write "virtuous and accomplished," or "of many virtues and
accomplishments," not "of many virtues and accomplished;" "riding or walking" or "on foot or horseback,"
not "on foot or riding." In the same way, do not put adjectives and participles, active and passive forms of
verbs, in too close juxtaposition. Avoid such sentences as the following:--
"He had good reason to believe that the delay was not an accident (accidental) but premeditated, and for
supposing (to suppose, or else, for believing, above) that the fort, though strong both by art and naturally
(nature), would be forced by the treachery of the governor and the indolent (indolence of the) general to
capitulate within a week."
"They accused him of being bribed (receiving bribes from) by the king and unwilling (neglecting) to take the
city."
*41. Antithesis adds force, and often clearness.*--The meaning of liberal in the following sentence is
ascertained by the antithesis:--
"All the pleasing illusions which made power(a) gentle(b) and obedience(a') liberal(b') ... are now to be
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
23


===== PAGE 24 =====
destroyed."
There is a kind of proportion. As gentleness is to power, so liberality (in the sense here used) is to obedience.
Now gentleness is the check on the excess of power; therefore liberal here applies to that which checks the
excess of obedience, i.e. checks servility. Hence liberal here means "free."
The contrast also adds force. "They aimed at the rule(a), not at the destruction(a'), of their country. They were
men of great civil(b) and great military(b') talents, and, if the terror(c), the ornament(c') of their age."
Excessive antithesis is unnatural and wearisome:--
"Who can persuade where treason(a) is above reason(a'), and might(b) ruleth right(b'), and it is had for
lawful(c) whatsoever is lustful(c'), and commotioners(d) are better than commissioners(d'), and common
woe(e) is named common wealth(e')?"
*42. Epigram.*--It has been seen that the neglect of climax results in lameness. Sometimes the suddenness of
the descent produces amusement: and when the descent is intentional and very sudden, the effect is striking as
well as amusing. Thus:--
(1) "You are not only not vicious, you are virtuous," is a climax.
(2) "You are not vicious, you are vice," is not climax, nor is it bathos: it is epigram.[15]
Epigram may be defined as a "short sentence expressing truth under an amusing appearance of incongruity." It
is often antithetical.
"The Russian grandees came to { and diamonds," climax. court dropping pearls { and vermin," epigram.
"These two nations were divided { and the bitter remembrance by mutual fear { of recent losses," climax. {
and mountains," epigram.
There is a sort of implied antithesis in:--
"He is full of information--(but flat also) like yesterday's Times."
"Verbosity is cured (not by a small, but) by a large vocabulary."
The name of epigram may sometimes be given to a mere antithesis; e.g. "An educated man should know
something of everything, and everything of something."
*43. Let each sentence have one, and only one, principal subject of thought.*
"This great and good man died on the 17th of September, 1683, leaving behind him the memory of many
noble actions, and a numerous family, of whom three were sons; one of them, George, the eldest, heir to his
father's virtues, as well as to his principal estates in Cumberland, where most of his father's property was
situate, and shortly afterwards elected member for the county, which had for several generations returned this
family to serve in Parliament." Here we have (1) the "great and good man," (2) "George," (3) "the county,"
disputing which is to be considered the principal subject. Two, if not three sentences should have been made,
instead of one. Carefully avoid a long sentence like this, treating of many different subjects on one level. It is
called heterogeneous.
*44. The connection between different sentences must be kept up by Adverbs used as Conjunctions, or by
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
24


===== PAGE 25 =====
means of some other connecting words at the beginning of each sentence.*--Leave out the conjunctions and
other connecting words, and it will be seen that the following sentences lose much of their meaning:--
"Pitt was in the army for a few months in time of peace. His biographer (accordingly) insists on our
confessing, that, if the young cornet had remained in the service, he would have been one of the ablest
commanders that ever lived. (But) this is not all. Pitt (, it seems,) was not merely a great poet in esse and a
great general in posse, but a finished example of moral excellence.... (The truth is, that) there scarcely ever
lived a person who had so little claim to this sort of praise as Pitt. He was (undoubtedly) a great man. (But) his
was not a complete and well-proportioned greatness. The public life of Hampden or of Somers resembles a
regular drama which can be criticised as a whole, and every scene of which is to be viewed in connection with
the main action. The public life of Pitt (, on the other hand,) is," &c.
The following are some of the most common connecting adverbs, or connecting phrases: (1) expressing
consequence, similarity, repetition, or resumption of a subject--accordingly, therefore, then, naturally, so that,
thus, in this way, again, once more, to resume, to continue, to sum up, in fact, upon this; (2) expressing
opposition--nevertheless, in spite of this, yet, still, however, but, on the contrary, on the other hand; (3)
expressing suspension--undoubtedly ... but; indeed ... yet; on the one hand ... on the other; partly ... partly;
some ... others.
Avoid a style like that of Bishop Burnet, which strings together a number of sentences with "and" or "so," or
with no conjunction at all:
"Blake with the fleet happened to be at Malaga, before he made war upon Spain; and some of his seamen
went ashore, and met the Host carried about; and not only paid no respect to it, but laughed at those who did."
Write "When Blake &c."
*45. The connection between two long sentences sometimes requires a short intervening sentence, showing
the transition of thought.*
"Without force or opposition, it (chivalry) subdued the fierceness of pride and power; it obliged sovereigns to
submit to the soft collar[16] of social esteem, compelled stern authority to submit to elegance, and gave a
dominating vanquisher of laws to be subdued by manners. But now (all is to be changed:) all the pleasing
illusions which made power gentle and obedience liberal, which harmonized the different shades of life, and
which, by a bland assimilation, incorporated into politics the sentiments that beautify and soften private
society, are to be dissolved by this new conquering empire of light and reason." If the words italicized were
omitted, the transition would be too abrupt: the conjunction but alone would be insufficient.
FOOTNOTES:
[5] For, at the beginning of a sentence, sometimes causes temporary doubt, while the reader is finding out
whether it is used as a conjunction or preposition.
[6] It should refer (1) either to the Noun immediately preceding, or (2) to some Noun superior to all
intervening Nouns in emphasis. See (25).
[7] So useful that, on mature consideration, I am disposed to adopt "that" here and in several of the following
exceptional cases.
[8] Of course "and which" may be used where "which" precedes.
[9] "That which," where that is an object, e.g. "then (set forth) that which is worse," St. John ii. 10, is rare in
modern English.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
25


===== PAGE 26 =====
[10] Sometimes the emphatic Adverb comes at the beginning, and causes the transposition of an Auxiliary
Verb, "Gladly do I consent."
[11] Of course punctuation will remove the ambiguity; but it is better to express oneself clearly, as far as
possible, independently of punctuation.
[12] Professor Bain.
[13] See (30).
[14] The repetition of Auxiliary Verbs and Pronominal Adjectives is also conducive to clearness.
[15] Professor Bain says: "In the epigram the mind is roused by a conflict or contradiction between the form
of the language and the meaning really conveyed."
[16] This metaphor is not recommended for imitation.
* * * * *
BREVITY.
*46. Metaphor is briefer than literal statement.* See (13).
"The cares and responsibilities of a sovereign often disturb his sleep," is not so brief as "Uneasy lies the head
that wears a crown," where the effect of care on the mind is assimilated to the effect of a heavy crown
pressing on the head.
*47. General terms are briefer, though less forcible, than particular terms.* Thus: "He devours literature, no
matter of what kind," is shorter than, "Novels or sermons, poems or histories, no matter what, he devours
them all."
*47 a. A phrase may be expressed by a word.*
"These impressions can never be forgotten, i.e. are indelible."
"The style of this book is of such a nature that it cannot be understood, i.e. unintelligible."
The words "of such a nature that" are often unnecessarily inserted. See the extract from Sir Archibald Alison.
*48. Participles can often be used as brief (though sometimes ambiguous) equivalents of phrases containing
Conjunctions and Verbs.*
"Hearing (when he heard) this, he advanced." See (7) for more instances. So "phrases containing
conjunctions" means "phrases that contain conjunctions." "This done, (for, when this was done) he retired."
Sometimes the participle "being" is omitted. "France at our doors, he sees no danger nigh," for "France being"
or "though France is."
*49. Participles and participial adjectives may be used like Adjectives, as equivalents for phrases containing
the Relative.*
"The never-ceasing wind," "the clamouring ocean," "the drenching rain," are instances. The licence of
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
26


===== PAGE 27 =====
inventing participial adjectives by adding -ing to a noun, is almost restricted to poetry. You could not write
"the crannying wind" in prose.
*50. A statement may sometimes be briefly implied instead of being expressed at length.* Thus, instead of
"The spirit of Christianity was humanizing, and therefore &c.," or "Christianity, since it was (or being) of a
humanizing spirit, discouraged &c.," we can write more briefly and effectively, "Gladiatorial shows were first
discouraged, and finally put down, by the humanizing spirit of Christianity." So instead of "The nature of
youth is thoughtless and sanguine, and therefore &c.," we can write, "The danger of the voyage was
depreciated and the beauty of the island exaggerated by the thoughtless nature of youth."
Sometimes a mere name or epithet implies a statement. "It was in vain that he offered the Swiss terms: war
was deliberately preferred by the hardy mountaineers," i.e. "by the Swiss, because they were mountaineers
and hardy." "The deed was applauded by all honest men, but the Government affected to treat it as murder,
and set a price upon the head of (him whom they called) the assassin." "The conqueror of Austerlitz might be
expected to hold different language from the prisoner of St. Helena," i.e. "Napoleon when elated by the
victory of Austerlitz," and "Napoleon when depressed by his imprisonment at St. Helena."
CAUTION.--Different names must not be used for the same person unless each of them derives an
appropriateness from its context. Thus, if we are writing about Charles II., it would be in very bad taste to
avoid repeating "he" by using such periphrases as the following: "The third of the Stewarts hated business,"
"the Merry Monarch died in the fifty-fourth year of his age," &c.
*51. Conjunctions may be omitted.* The omission gives a certain forcible abruptness, e.g. "You say this: I (on
the other hand) deny it."
When sentences are short, as in Macaulay's writings, conjunctions may be advantageously omitted.
Where a contrast is intended, the conjunction but usually prepares the way for the second of the two
contrasted terms: "He is good but dull." Where and is used instead of but, the incongruity savours of epigram:
"He always talks truthfully and prosily." "He is always amusing and false."
*51 a. The Imperative Mood may be used for "if."*
"Strip (for, if you strip) Virtue of the awful authority she derives from the general reverence of mankind, and
you rob her of half her majesty."
*52. Apposition may be used so as to convert two sentences into one.*
"We called at the house of a person to whom we had letters of introduction, a musician, and, what is more, a
good friend to all young students of music." This is as clear as, and briefer than, "He was a musician, &c."
*53. Condensation may be effected by not repeating (1) the common subject of several verbs, (2) the common
object of several verbs or prepositions.*
(1) "He resided here for many years, and, after he had won the esteem of all the citizens, (he) died," &c. So,
(2) "He came to, and was induced to reside in, this city," is shorter than "He came to this city, and was
induced to reside in it."
Such condensation often causes obscurity, and, even where there is no obscurity, there is a certain harshness
in pausing on light, unemphatic words, such as to, in, &c., as in the first example.
*54. Tautology.*--The fault of repeating the same word several times unnecessarily is called tautology, e.g.:
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
27


===== PAGE 28 =====
"This is a painful circumstance; it is a circumstance that I much regret, and he also will much regret the
circumstance." But the fault is not to be avoided by using different words to mean the same thing, as, "This is
a painful event; it is a circumstance that I much regret, and he also will greatly lament the occurrence." The
true remedy is to arrange the words in such a manner that there may be no unnecessary repetition, thus: "This
is a painful circumstance, a circumstance that causes me, and will cause him, deep regret."
The repetition of the same meaning in slightly different words is a worse fault than the repetition of the same
word. See, for examples, the extract from Sir Archibald Alison, at the end of the book. Thus "A burning thirst
for conquests is a characteristic of this nation. It is an ardent passion that &c." Other instances are--"The
universal opinion of all men;" "His judgment is so infallible that it is never deceived," &c.
*55. Parenthesis may be used with advantage to brevity.*
"We are all (and who would not be?) offended at the treatment we have received," is shorter and more forcible
than the sentence would have been if the parenthesis had been appended in a separate sentence: "Who, indeed,
would not be offended?"
Extreme care must, however, be taken that a parenthesis may not obscure the meaning of a long sentence.
*56. Caution: let clearness be the first consideration.* It is best, at all events for beginners, not to aim so much
at being brief, or forcible, as at being perfectly clear. Horace says, "While I take pains to be brief, I fall into
obscurity," and it may easily be seen that several of the rules for brevity interfere with the rules for clearness.
Forcible style springs from (1) vividness and (2) exactness of thought, and from a corresponding (1) vividness
and (2) exactness in the use of words.
(1) When you are describing anything, endeavour to see it and describe it as you see it. If you are writing
about a man who was killed, see the man before you, and ask, was he executed, cut down, run through the
body, butchered, shot, or hanged? If you are writing about the capture of a city, was the city stormed,
surprised, surrendered, starved out, or demolished before surrender? Was an army repelled, defeated, routed,
crushed, or annihilated?
(2) Exactness in the use of words requires an exact knowledge of their meanings and differences. This is a
study by itself, and cannot be discussed here.[17]
FOOTNOTES:
[17] See English Lessons for English People, pp. 1-53.
EXERCISES
For an explanation of the manner in which these Exercises are intended to be used, see the Preface.
A number in brackets by itself, or followed by a letter, e.g. (43), (40 a), refers to the Rules.
Letters by themselves in brackets, e.g. (b), refer to the explanations or hints appended to each sentence.
N.B..--(10 a) refers to the first section of Rule (10); (10 a') to the Rule following Rule (10).
1. "Pleasure and excitement had more attractions for him than (a) (36) (37 a) his friend, and the two
companions became estranged (15 a) gradually."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
28


===== PAGE 29 =====
(a) Write (1) "than for his friend," or (2) "than had his friend," "had more attractions than his friend."
2. "(a) He soon grew tired of solitude even in that beautiful scenery, (36) the pleasures of the retirement (8)
which he had once pined for, and (36) leisure which he could use to no good purpose, (a) (30) being (15)
restless by nature."
(a) This sentence naturally stops at "purpose." Also "being restless" seems (wrongly) to give the reason why
"leisure" could not be employed. Begin "Restless by nature...."
3. "The opponents of the Government are naturally, and not (a) (40 a) without justification, elated at the
failure of the bold attempt to return two supporters of the Government at the recent election, (b) (10 a') which
is certainly to be regretted."
(a) "unjustifiably." (b) Write, for "which," either (1) "an attempt that &c.," or (2) "a failure that &c."
4. "Carelessness in the Admiralty departments has co-operated with Nature to weaken the moral power of a
Government that particularly needs to be thought efficient in (a) (5) this respect, (b) (29) to counterbalance a
general distrust of its excessive desire (c) (47 a) to please everybody in Foreign Affairs."
(a) Write "the Navy." (b) Instead of "to" write "in order to," so as to distinguish the different infinitives, (c)
"obsequiousness."
5. "(a) He was sometimes supported by Austria, who, oddly enough, appears under Count Beust to have been
more friendly to Italy than (37 a) France, (30) in this line of action."
(a) Begin with "In this line of action." Why? (b) Write "than was France" or "than France was."
6. "There was something so startling in (a) (5) this assertion, (a) (4) that the discoveries of previous
investigators were to be (b) (47 a) treated as though they had never been made, and (4) that one who had not
yet (47 a) attained the age of manhood had superseded the grey-headed philosophers (8) who had for centuries
patiently sought after the truth, (4) that (a) (5) it naturally provoked derision."
(a) "This," "that," and "it," cause a little perplexity. Write "The startling assertion that the discoveries...." (b)
"ignored." (c) "a mere youth," "a mere stripling."
7. "One of the recommendations (on which very (a) (26) (47, a) much depended) of the Commission was that
a council in each province should establish smaller councils, each to have the oversight of a small district, and
(b) (37) report to a central council on the state of Education in (c) (5) it."
(a) Write "cardinal recommendations." Derive "cardinal." (b) Write, either (1) "and should report," or (2) "and
to report." (c) Write "in its province," or "district."
8. "At this (a) (1) period an (b) (11) event (c) (1) transpired that destroyed the last hopes of peace. The king
fell from his horse and died two hours after the fall (d) (30), which was occasioned by his horse's stumbling
on a mole-hill, while he was on his return from reviewing his soldiers."
(a) What is a "period"? (b) Express the particular kind of event ("accident"). (c) What is the meaning of
"transpired"? (d) Transpose thus: "While the king was on his return ... his horse ...; the king fell and &c." The
cause should precede the effect.
9. "He determined (c) on selling all his estates, and, as soon as this was done (40 a), to (c) quit the country, (a)
(33) believing that his honour demanded this sacrifice and (40) (40 a) in (b) the hope of satisfying his
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
29


===== PAGE 30 =====
creditors."
(a) Begin with "Believing that &c." (b) "hoping thereby to satisfy &c." (c) "to sell" or "on quitting.".
10. "He read patiently on, Leading Articles, Foreign Correspondence, Money Article and all; (a) (43) during
which his father fell asleep, and he (b) went in search of his sister."
Point out the absurdity of "during which" applied to the last part of the sentence. (a) "Meanwhile." (b) Insert
"then."
11. "The general was quite (a) (1) conscious (40 a) how treacherous were the intentions of those who were (b)
(49) entertaining him, and (40 a) of the dangers from which he had escaped (15) lately."
(a) Distinguish between "conscious" and "aware." (b) "entertainers."
12. "If certain (a) (11) books had been published a hundred years ago, there can be no doubt that certain
recent (b) (11) historians would have made great use of them. But it would (c) (15 b) not, on that account, be
judicious in a writer of our own times to publish an edition of the works of one of these (b) (11) historians, in
which large extracts from these books should be incorporated with the original text."
(a) "Mrs. Hutchinson's Memoirs." (b) "Mr. Hume." (c) Add at the end of the sentence, "Surely not."
13. "He made no attempt to get up a petition, (32) though he did not like the new representative quite so well
as (a) (37 a) his colleagues."
(a) "as did his colleagues" or "as he liked his colleagues."
14. "Though he was (a) (15) obstinate and (15) unprincipled, yet he could not face an angered father (15 a) in
spite of his effrontery."
(a) Begin with "Obstinate."
15. "He was known to his country neighbours (a) (15) during more than forty years as a gentleman of
cultivated mind, (40 a) whose principles were high, (40 a) with polished address, happy in his family, and (b)
(40 a) actively discharging local duties; and (40 a) among political men, as an honest, industrious, and
sensible member of Parliament, (40 a) without (c) eagerness to display his talents, (40 a) who (10 g) was
stanch to his party, and attentive to the interests of those whose (d) (47 a) representative he was."
(a) "During more &c.," is emphatic, and affects the latter as well as the former half of the sentence: hence it
should stand first. (b) "in the discharge of." (c) "not eager." (d) Condense into one word.
16. "The poor think themselves no more disgraced by taking bribes at elections than (a) (37 a) the rich by
offering them."
(a) Write (1) "Than the rich think themselves disgraced," or (2) "Than they think the rich disgraced."
17. "We are told that the Sultan Mahmoud, by his perpetual wars, (a) (41) and his tyranny, (a) (41) had filled
his dominions with (b) (1) misfortune and (c) (11) calamity, and greatly (d) (11) diminished the population of
the Persian Empire. This great Sultan had (e) (50) a Vizier. We are not (f) (55) (15) informed whether he was
a humorist or an enthusiast, (g) but he pretended (h) that he had learned from (i) (11) some one how to
understand the language of birds, so that he (j) (5) knew what was said by any bird that opened its mouth. (k)
(44) One evening he was with the Sultan, returning from hunting. They saw a couple of owls which (10 g)
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
30


===== PAGE 31 =====
were sitting upon a tree (l) (8) which grew near an old wall out of a heap of rubbish. The Sultan said (6) he
should like to know what the two owls were saying to one another, and asked the (m) Vizier to listen to their
discourse and give him an account of it. The Vizier, (n) (31) pretending to be very attentive to the owls,
approached the tree. He (o) returned to the Sultan and said that (6) he had heard part of their conversation, but
did not wish to tell him what it was. (p) (5) He, not (q) (31) being satisfied with this answer, forced him to
repeat everything the owls had said (20) exactly. (r) (44) (5) (6) He told (5) him that the owls were arranging a
treaty of marriage between their children, and that one of them, after agreeing to settle five hundred villages
upon the female owl, had prayed (6) that God would grant a long life to Sultan Mahmoud, because as long as
he reigned over them they would never want ruined villages. The story says (s) that (t) (5) he was touched
with the fable, (30) and (s) that he (a) (39) from that time forward consulted (15) the good of his people, and
that he rebuilt the towns and villages (v) which had been destroyed."
(a) "abroad ... at home." (b) "ruin." (c) "desolation." (d) "half unpeopled." (e) "The Vizier of &c." (f) "We are
not informed" is emphatic, and therefore should be inverted, "whether he was, &c., we are not informed." (g)
"but he" will be omitted when "the Vizier" is made the subject of "pretended." (h) "Pretended" once meant
"claimed," "professed." Write "professed." (i) "a certain dervish." (j) Introduce a new subject that you may
substitute "Vizier" for "he," thus: "so that not a bird could open its mouth, but the Vizier knew &c." (k) "As he
was, one evening, &c." (l) Note that the tree is represented as growing out of ruins. This is in accordance with
the story of the mischief Mahmoud had done. (m) Omit this. (n) "Suspense" is out of place in a simple
narrative like this; the sentence therefore ends with "owls." (o) "Upon his return." (p) "The Sultan" (q) "would
not be satisfied." (r) "You must know then, &c." (s) Omit. (t) "so touched ... that." (u) end with "people." (v)
Addison here uses "which" probably because of the preceding "that." We have to choose between sound and
clearness. "Which" implies that all the villages in the country had been destroyed, whereas the country had
been only (see above) "half unpeopled."
18. "Though this great king never permitted any pastime to interfere with the duties of state, which he
considered to be superior to (54) all other claims and of paramount importance, and (a) (37) kept himself so
far under control that he allowed no one pursuit or amusement to run to any excess, yet he took (54) great
pleasure in the chase, of which he was (b) (2) excessively (54) fond, and for the purposes of which he created
several large parks of considerable (54) magnitude."
(a) Either repeat "though," or else strikeout the first "though" and begin a new sentence after "excess." (b)
Point out the contradiction between "excessively" and what precedes.
19. "To inundate (a) (11) their land, to man their ships, to leave their country, with all its miracles of art and
industry, its cities, its villas, and its (b) (11) pastures buried under the waves (c) (11); to bear to a distant
climate their (d) (11) faith and their old (e) (11) liberties; to establish, with auspices that(10 a) might perhaps
be happier, the new (f) (11) constitution of their commonwealth, in a (g) (11) foreign and strange (h) (11)
land, in the Spice Islands of the Eastern Seas, (38) were the plans which they had the spirit to form."
(a) Introduce "dykes." (b) Introduce something peculiar to the Dutch, e.g. "canals," "tulip gardens." (c) "of the
German Ocean." (d) The Dutch were Calvinists. (e) The country was in old times "Batavia," so that
"Batavian" would be a fit epithet to denote what the Dutch had inherited from their forefathers. (f)
"Stadthaus," the German for "town-hall." (g) "other stars." (h) "strange vegetation."
20. "During twenty years of unexampled prosperity, during (a) which the wealth of the nation had shot (14 a)
up and extended its branches on every side, and the funds had (14 a) soared to a higher point than had been
ever attained before, (b) (15) speculation had become general."
(a) Omit. (b) Begin a new sentence: "This, or Prosperity, had increased the taste for speculation."
21. "At that time (a) (16) a mere narrow-minded pedant (for he deserves no better name) had been set up by
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
31


===== PAGE 32 =====
the literary world as a great author, and as the supreme (b) critic, alone qualified to deliver decisions which
could never be (b) reversed upon (15 a) the literary productions of the day."
(a) End with " ... one who was--for he deserves no better name--a mere narrow-minded pedant." (b) "Which
could never be reversed" can be expressed in one word; or else "the supreme ... reversed" may be condensed
into a personification: "a very Minos of contemporary criticism."
22. "With the intention of fulfilling his promise, and (40 a) intending also to clear himself from the suspicion
that attached to him, he determined to ascertain how (40 a) far this testimony was corroborated, and (a) (40 a)
the motives of the prosecutor, (b) (43) who had begun the suit last Christmas."
(a) "what were." (b) Begin a new sentence, "The latter &c.," or "The suit had been begun &c."
23. "The Jewish nation, relying on the teaching of their prophets, looked forward to a time when its
descendants should be as numerous as the heavenly (11) bodies, and when the products (a) (11) of the earth
should be so increased as to create an abundant (54) plenty, when each man should rest beneath the shade of
his own (a) (11) trees, and when the instruments (11) of war should be converted to the (11) uses of peace."
(a) Mention some "products," "trees" of Palestine.
24. "He replied (32), when he was asked the reason for his sudden unpopularity, that he owed it to his refusal
to annul the commercial treaty, (a) (8) which(10 a') gave great displeasure to the poorer classes."
(a) Point out the ambiguity, and remove it by (8) or (10 a').
25. "I saw my old schoolfellow again by mere accident when I was in London at the time of the first
Exhibition, (19) walking down Regent Street and looking in at the shops."
Point out and remove the ambiguity.
26. "He remained in the House while his speech was taken into consideration; which (52) was a common
practice with him, because the debates amused his sated mind, and indeed he used to say (a) (6 b) that they
were sometimes as good as a comedy. His Majesty had certainly never seen a more (17) sudden turn in any
comedy of intrigue, either at his own play-house or the Duke's, than that which this memorable debate
produced."
(a) "and were sometimes, he used to say, as good &c."
27. "The Commons would not approve the war (20) expressly; neither did they as yet condemn it (20)
expressly; and (a) (18) the king might even have obtained a supply for continuing hostilities (19) from them,
on condition of (b) redressing grievances connected with the (c) administration of affairs at home, among
which the Declaration of Indulgence was a very important (d) (15a) one."
(a) Write "they were even ready to grant the king &c." (b) Use the verb with a subject, (c) Condense all this
into one adjective, meaning "that which takes place at home." (d) End with a noun, "importance," or
"foremost place."
28. "Next to thinking clearly, (a) (5) it is useful to speak clearly, and whatever your position in life may
hereafter be it cannot be such (54) as not to be improved by this, (b) so that it is worth while making almost
any effort to acquire (c) it, if it is not a natural gift: (d) it being an undoubted (d) fact that the effort to acquire
it must be successful, to some extent at least, if (d) it be moderately persevered in."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
32


===== PAGE 33 =====
(a) "Next in utility ... comes speaking clearly--a power that must be of assistance to you &c." (b)" If,
therefore, you cannot speak clearly by nature, you &c." (c) "this power." (d) Omit "fact;" "for undoubtedly,
with moderate perseverance &c."
29. "It (a) (38) appears to me (15) a greater victory than Agincourt, a grander triumph of wisdom and faith
and courage than even the English constitution or (b) liturgy, to have beaten back, or even fought against and
stemmed in ever so small a degree, those basenesses that (c) (10a) beset human nature, which are now held so
invincible that the influences of them are assumed as the fundamental axioms of economic science."
(a) Begin with "To have beaten &c.," and end with "liturgy." (b) Repeat for clearness and emphasis, "the
English." (c) "The besetting basenesses of &c."
30. "The (a) (2) unprecedented impudence of our youthful representative reminds us forcibly of the
unblushing and (54) (40) remarkable effrontery (c) (which (26) he almost succeeds in equalling) of the
Member for St. Alban's, whom our (b) (1) neophyte (b) (1) alluded to, in the last speech with which he
favoured those whom (47a) he represents, (19) as his pattern and example."
(a) Show that "unprecedented" is inconsistent with what follows. (b) What is the meaning of "neophyte,"
"alluded to"? (c) Begin a new sentence, "Our young adventurer &c.," and end with "and he almost succeeds in
equalling his master."
31. "The (a) (1) veracity of this story is questionable, and there is the more reason for doubting the (a) (1)
truth of the narrator, because in his remarks on the (1) observation of the Sabbath he distinctly (a) (1) alludes
to a custom that can be shown never to have existed."
(a) Distinguish between "veracity" and "truth," "observation" and "observance." Show the inconsistency
between "allude" and "distinctly."
32. "It (a) (5) is a most just distribution, (10 a) which the late Mr. Tucker has dwelt upon so (b) largely in his
works, between pleasures in which we are passive, and pleasures in which we are active. And I believe every
attentive observer of human life will assent to (c) this position, that however (d) grateful the sensations may
occasionally be in which we are passive, it is not these, but the latter class of our pleasures, (8) which
constitutes satisfaction, (e) (38) which supply that regular stream of moderate and miscellaneous enjoyments
in (10 c) which happiness, as distinguished from voluptuousness, consists."
(a) "There is great justice in &c." (b) Omit "so." (c) "admit." (d) Not often now used in this sense. (e) Repeat
the antecedent, "I mean those (pleasures) &c."
33. "The prince seemed to have before him a limitless (54) prospect of unbounded prosperity, carefully (33)
trained for the (a) tasks of the throne, and stimulated by the (a) pattern of his father, (b) who (43) breathed
his (3) last suddenly at the age of sixty-two, just after the conclusion of the war."
(a) Find more appropriate words. (b) Begin a new sentence.
34. "On his way, he visited a son of an old friend (a) (25) who had asked him to call upon him on his journey
northward. He (b) (5) was overjoyed to see him, and (c) he sent for one of his most intelligent workmen and
told (d) him to consider himself at (e) his service, (30) as he himself could not take (f) him as he (g) wished
about the city."
(a) If you mean that the "son" had "asked him," write "An old friend's son who;" if you mean that the "friend"
had "asked him," write "He had been asked by an old friend to call, on his journey northward, upon his son.
Accordingly he visited him on his way." (b) Use, instead of he, some name meaning "one who entertains
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
33


===== PAGE 34 =====
others." (c) Use participle, (d) "The man." (e) "the stranger's." (f) "his guest." (g) Write "could have wished" to
make it clear that "he" means "the host."
35. "Tillotson died in this year. He was exceedingly beloved both by King William and by Queen Mary (43),
who nominated Dr. Tennison, Bishop of Lincoln, to succeed him."
36. "(a) The entertainment was arranged with a magnificence that was (b) perfectly stupendous and (c) most
unprecedented, and which quite kept up his Lordship's unrivalled reputation for unparalleled hospitality, and,
thanks to the unequalled energy of Mr. Smith, who is rapidly becoming one of the most effective toast-masters
in the kingdom, the toasts were given with a spirit quite unexampled on occasions of this nature; and indeed
we were forcibly reminded in this respect of the inimitable entertainment of three years ago (2)."
(a) Omit most of the epithets, or soften them down. Point out the contradictions in the sentence as it stands.
(b) Write "a remarkable magnificence that quite &c.," thus dispensing with the following "and." (c) Show that
"most" is superfluous.
37. "If we compare Shakespeare with the other dramatic authors of the Elizabethan era, his wonderful
superiority to them in the (15) knowledge of human nature is what (15 a) principally strikes us."
38. "The prince found himself at once in sore perplexity how to provide himself with the commonest comforts
or even necessaries of life, when he landed on this desolate coast, being (33) accustomed to luxury."
39. "This make-shift policy recommended itself to the succeeding ministers (a) (50), both because they were
timid and because they were prejudiced, and they were delighted to excuse (b) (13) themselves by quoting the
example of one who (c) (34) had controlled the Liberals and humoured the Conservatives, (37) commended
himself to the country at large by his unfailing good-humour, and (d) (44) (37) done nothing worthy of the
name of statesman."
(a) "to the timidity and prejudices of &c." (b) "shelter themselves behind." (c) "while he had at once." (d) "had
yet done."
40. "William Shakespeare was the sun among the lesser lights of English poetry, and a native of
Stratford-on-Avon (14 a)."
41. "(15 b) I think, gentlemen, you must confess that any one of you would have done the same (32), if you
had been tempted as I was then, placed starving and ragged among wasteful luxury and comfort, deliberately
instigated to acts of dishonesty by those whom I had been taught from infancy to love, (a) praised when I
stole, mocked or punished when I failed to (15 a) do (b) so."
(a) Insert another infinitive beside "love." "Love" produces "obedience." (b) Repeat the verb instead of "do
so."
42. "So far from being the first (54) aggressor, he not (22) only refused to prosecute his old friend when a
favourable opportunity presented itself for revenging himself thus upon him, but also his friend's adviser, John
Smith. Smith (a) at all (23) events suspected, if he did not know of the coming danger, and had given no
information of it."
(a) If "at all events" qualifies "Smith," the sentence must be altered. "Yet, however innocent his friend may
have been, at all events Smith suspected...." If the words qualify "suspected," place them after "suspected."
43. "It is quite true that he paid 5s. per day to English navvies, and even 6s., (19) in preference to 2s. 6d. to
French navvies."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
34


===== PAGE 35 =====
44. "Having climbed to the apex of the Righi to enjoy the spectacle of the sun-rise, I found myself so
incommoded by a number of illiterate individuals who had emerged from the hotel for a (a) (1) similar
purpose, that I determined to quit them at the earliest practicable period; and therefore, without stopping to
partake of breakfast, I wended my way back with all possible celerity." (3)
(a) "the same."
45. "You admit that miracles are not natural. Now whatever is unnatural is wrong, and since, by your own
admission, miracles are unnatural, it follows that miracles are wrong." (1)
46. "Who is the man that has dared to call into civilized alliance the (a) (41) inhabitant of the woods, to
delegate to the (a) Indian the defence of our disputed rights?
(a) Insert some antithetical or other epithets.
47. "A (a) very (11) small proportion indeed of those who have attempted to solve this problem (b) (19) have
succeeded in obtaining even a plausible solution."
(a) State what proportion succeeded, or, if you like, what failed: "not one in a hundred." (b) Begin, "Of all
those that &c."
48. "To be suddenly (a) (47 a) brought into contact with a system (8) which forces one to submit to wholesale
imposture, and to being (40 a) barbarously ill-treated, naturally repels (a) (15 a) one."
(a) Write, either (1) "Collision ... causes a natural repulsion," or (2) "When brought into contact ... one is
naturally repelled," or (if "ill-treatment" is emphatic), (3) "One is naturally repelled by collision with &c."
49. "We annex a letter recently addressed by Mr. ----'s direction to the Editor of the ----, in contradiction of
statements, equally untrue, which appeared in that periodical, and (a) (9) which the editor has undertaken to
insert in the next number.... I am sure that all must regret that statements so (b) (51) utterly erroneous should
have (c) (23) first appeared in a publication of such high character."
(a) What the writer intended to express was that the editor had undertaken to insert, not the "statements," but
the "contradiction." (b) Omit either "so" or "utterly." (c) "appeared first," or, "for the first time."
50. "This is a book which (10 a) is short and amusing, which (10 a) can be easily (a) understood, which (10 a)
is admirably adapted for the purpose for which it (b) was (54) written; and (10 e) which ought to be more
popular than the last work which (10 a) was published by the same author."
(a) Express "which can be understood" in one adjective. (b) "Its purpose."
51. "When thousands are left (19) without (40) pity and without (40) attention (19) on a field of battle, amid
(40) the insults of an enraged foe and (40) the trampling of horses, while the blood from their wounds,
freezing as it flows, binds them to the earth, and (40) they are exposed to the piercing air, it (15 a) must be
indeed a painful scene."
The whole sentence must be remedied by (40).
52. "(a) The youth was naturally thoughtful, and disposed (19) besides by his early training--(31) which had
been conducted with great care, the object of his parents being to pave (14) his way as far as possible over the
stormy (14) sea of temptation and to lead him into the harbour of virtue--to a sincere (b) (1) remorse (19) for
the (b) (1) crimes that he had committed in the sight of heaven, and also for his recent (b) (1) sin in breaking
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
35


===== PAGE 36 =====
the laws of his country."
(a) First state the reasons for his being "disposed." "The youth was naturally thoughtful; moreover, his early
training had been conducted with great care by his parents, whose &c. .... He was therefore disposed &c." (b)
What is the difference between "remorse" and "repentance," between "sin" and "crime"?
53. "(a) One day (54) early in the morning, the general was approached by a messenger, (30) in the midst of
the entanglements and perplexities which had unexpectedly surprised him, when the perilous hour of (54)
danger was at hand, and (37), in spite of their promises, even the tribes that were well disposed (54) and
friendly, were threatening to desert him, and (54) leave him to face the enemy (b) (23) alone."
Condense the sentence by omitting some of the italicized words, e.g. (a) "Early one morning." (b) Though
there is no real ambiguity (unless a wrong emphasis is placed on "enemy"), yet, in strictness, "alone" ought to
qualify "enemy." Write therefore, "alone in the face of the enemy."
54. "A man (a) (10 d) who neglected the ordinary duties *of* life, and, immersed in study, devoted himself to
grand plans for the benefit of mankind, (b) (44) and refused to provide for the wants of those dependent on
him, and suffered his aged relatives to become paupers because he would not help them, (c) would, in my
opinion, (34) be a bad man, and not altogether (d) (40 a) without hypocrisy."
(a) "If a man." (b) "if he refused," or "while he refused." (c) "such a man" or "he." (d) "to some extent a
hypocrite."
55. "I cannot believe in the guilt of (a) one (b) (10 e) who, whatever may have been said to the contrary, can
be shown, and has been shown by competent testimony proceeding from those who are said to have carefully
examined the facts, in spite (23) of many obstacles, to have resisted all attempts to (29) induce him to leave
his situation, (c) (29) to consult his own interests and to (29) establish a business of his own."
(a) "his guilt;" (b) (1) "for, whatever &c.... it can be shown by &c.... that, in spite of &c., he resisted." Or (2)
insert "in spite ... obstacles" between "have" and "carefully." (c) (1) "for the purpose of consulting ... and
establishing." Or (2) write "and to consult his own interests by establishing &c."
56. "We must seek for the origin of our freedom, (a) (37) prosperity, and (a) (37) glory, in that and only (b)
that[18] portion of our annals, (30) though it (c) is sterile and obscure. The great English people was (d) then
formed; the notional (e) disposition began (d) then to exhibit those peculiarities which it has ever since (e)
possessed; and our fathers (d) then became emphatically islanders, (f) in their politics, (a) feelings, and (a)
manners, and (30 a) not merely in their geographical position."
(a) Repeat the Pronominal Adjective, (b) Express the emphatic "only that" by beginning the sentence thus: "It
is in that portion of our annals &c." (c) Omit. (d) "It was then that &c." (e) Use words implying something
more marked than "disposition," and more forcible than "possessed;" in the latter case, "retained." (f) Repeat
"islanders."
57. "(a) He was the universal (54) favourite of (54) all (8) who knew him, and cemented many friendships at
this period, (a) (33) (moving in the highest circle of society, and, as he (b) (50) had a (4 a) certain property,
being independent of the profits of literature), and soon completely extinguished the breath of slander which
at the outset of his career had threatened to sap the foundations of his reputation."
(a) Begin "Moving in &c." (b) "rendered independent of ... by &c." Show that Rule (14) is violated by the
metaphors.
58. "The outward and material form of that city which, during the brief period which (10 a) is comprised in
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
36


===== PAGE 37 =====
our present book, reached the highest pitch of military, artistic, and literary glory, was of this (a) (15) nature.
The progress of the (b) (5) first has been already traced."
(a) Begin the sentence with "Such was." (b) By "the first" is meant "military glory."
59. "The detachment not only failed to take the fort, (30) spite of their numbers and the weakness of the
garrison, but also to capture the small force that was encamped outside the town, and was, after some sharp
fighting, driven back with inconsiderable loss."
Point out the ambiguity. Remedy it by inserting either "which," or "the assailants."
60. "(a) (b) Believing that these reforms can only (c) (21) be effected as public opinion is prepared for them,
and that (5) this will be more or less advanced in different localities, the Bill of the Association, (a) (31)
which has been for a (3) considerable period in draft, and will be introduced in the next Session of
Parliament, provides for placing (d) (3) the control in regard to the points above-mentioned in the (3) hands
of the ratepayers of each locality; the power to be exercised through representative Licensing Boards to be
periodically elected by them."
(a) Place the parenthesis first, as an independent sentence: "The Bill of the Association has been ...
Parliament." (b) What noun is qualified by "believing?" Write "In the belief." (c) "effected only so far as they
are in accordance with public opinion, which &c." (d) "it, or, the Bill provides that the ratepayers ... shall
receive control ... and shall exercise this control."
61. "I think they are very (1) nice persons, for they kept me amused for a long (a) (11) time together yesterday
by their (1) nice stories all about what they (b) have experienced in Japan, where they had been for (a) ever so
long, and (c) (43) where they said that the natives ripped up their (d) (5) stomachs."
(a) Mention some time. (b) "experiences" or "adventures." (c) "among other things, they told us &c." (d)
"their own."
62. "To contend for advantageous monopolies, which are regarded with a dislike and a suspicion (a) which
daily (10 a) increases, (30) however natural it may be to be annoyed at the loss of that which one has once
possessed, (15 a) is useless."
(a) A compound adjective can be used, including "daily."
63. "Upon entering the rustic place of entertainment to partake of some refreshment, my nerves were horrified
by lighting on a number of boisterous individuals who were singing some species of harvest song, and
simultaneously imbibing that cup which, if it cheers, also inebriates; and when, banished from their society by
the fumes of the fragrant weed, I wended my way to the apartment which adjoined the one in which I had
hoped to rest my weary limbs, I found an interesting assortment of the fairer sex, who were holding a separate
confabulation apart from the revels of their rougher spouses."
Write "village inn," "next room," &c., for these absurd circumlocutions. See (3).
64. "When Burgoyne was born, in 1782, Napoleon and Wellington were both boys (11)."
Napoleon studied at Brienne, Wellington at Eton. Mention this, and, in order to imply the boyhood, call
Wellington "Arthur Wellesley."
65. "An honourable friend of mine, who is now, I believe, near me--(38) to whom I never can on any occasion
refer without feelings of respect, and, on this subject, (36) feelings of the most grateful homage; (38) whose
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
37


===== PAGE 38 =====
abilities upon this occasion, as upon some former ones, are not entrusted merely to the perishable eloquence
of the (a) day, but will live to be the admiration of that (a) hour when all of us are mute and most of us
forgotten: (b) (38) has told you that prudence is (52) the first of virtues, and (52) can never be used in the
cause of vice."
(a) Though "of the day" is a recognized expression for "ephemeral" or "transitory," yet to use "day" for a short
time, and "hour" for a longer, is objectionable. Write moment for day. Else write future for hour. (b) "--this
gentleman has told &c."
66. "To see the British artisan and his wife on the Sabbath, neat and clean and cheerful, with their children by
their sides, (a) (19) disporting themselves under the open canopy of heaven, is (15) pleasant."
(a) There is no reasonable ground for mistaking the sense here, as the context makes it clear; but since Lord
Shaftesbury was questioned whether he meant disporting to qualify "artisan and his wife" or "children," write
"and, by their sides, their children disporting &c."
67. "Even if (a) it were attended with extenuating circumstances, such conduct would deserve severe
reprobation, (b) and it is the more called for because it would seem that (c) it was the intention of the author
of the crime, in perpetrating (e) it, to inflict all the misery that was possible, upon his victim." See (5).
(a) Omit "it were." (b) "which." (c) "to have been." (d) Express "author of the crime" in one word. (e) Use the
noun.
68. "The (a) (1) observance of the heavenly bodies must have been attended with great difficulties, (b) (30)
before the telescope was (a) (1) discovered, and it is not to be wondered at if the investigations of astronomers
were often unsatisfactory, and failed to produce complete (a) (1) persuasion, (30) (15, a) under these
disadvantages."
(a) What is the difference between "observance" and "observation," "discover" and "invent," "persuasion" and
"conviction"? (b) Begin "Before &c."
69. "He plunged into the sea once more, (30) not content with his previous exertions. After a long and
dangerous struggle, he succeeded in reaching a poor woman that was crying piteously for help, and (a) (35)
was at last hauled safely to shore."
(a) Point put and remedy the ambiguity by inserting "he" or by writing "who," according to the meaning.
70. "Sir John Burgoyne himself, face to face with Todleben, became (a) (1) conscious of the difference
between the fortifications of San Sebastian and of Sebastopol, (b) which (10 e) was (c) (12) very weak
compared with Metz or Paris."
(a) What is the exact meaning of conscious? (b) Avoid the relative, by repeating the name, with a conjunction,
(c) "weakness itself."
71. "Upon Richard's leaving the (c) stage, the Commonwealth was again set up; and the Parliament which
Cromwell had (a) broken was brought together; but the army and they fell into new disputes: so they were
again (a) broken by the army: and upon that the nation was like to fall into (b) (11) great convulsions."
(a) Modern Eng., "broken up." (b) "violently convulsed." (c) It is a question whether this metaphor is in good
taste. The meaning is that Richard "retired from public life." It might be asserted that Richard, the
Commonwealth, the Parliament are regarded as so many puppets on a "stage." But this is extremely doubtful.
Make Parliament the principal subject: "When Richard retired ... and when the Commonwealth &c.... the
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
38


===== PAGE 39 =====
Parliament was ... but, falling into a dispute with &c., it was...." See (18) and (43).
72. "What a revolution in the military profession! He began with (a) (11) unnecessary formality, and (b) (11)
inefficient weapons, and ended with (c) (b) (11) greatly improved fire-arms."
(a) "pig-tail and pipe-clay." (b) "Six-pounders and flint-locks" are now inefficient compared with
"twenty-four-pounders and breech-loaders." (c) Something is wanted antithetical to (a), perhaps "loose drill"
or "open order."
73. "Children fear to go in the dark. Men fear death in the same way. The fear of children is increased by
tales. So is the fear of death. The contemplation of death, as the 'wages of sin,' and passage to another world,
is holy and religious. The fear of it, as a tribute due unto nature, is weak. In religious meditations on death
there is sometimes mixture of vanity and of superstition."
Insert connecting adverbs or conjunctions. See (44).
74. "I have often heard him reiterate (54) repeatedly that he would never again, if a safe (54) and secure path
was open to him, prefer the perilous (54) road of danger, however alluring (54) and attractive the latter might
be."
75. "I thought in my dream that when my friend asked me whether I did not observe anything curious in the
conduct of the pigeons, I (a) (4 a) remarked that if any one of the birds was so bold as to take an atom from a
heap of grain in the midst of them, (31) (which (b) a detachment guarded, and which, being continually
increased and never eaten, seemed useless), all the rest turned against him and pecked him to death for the (c)
(50) action."
(a) Point out the ambiguity. (b) This should come earlier in the sentence, and not as a parenthesis. "I noticed a
heap of grain in the midst of them, guarded by ... Being continually ..., to all appearance, useless: yet." (c)
"theft."
76. "If this low view of the royal office becomes generally adopted, then sovereigns who (8) have always
hitherto commanded the respect of Englishmen will by degrees fall into disrespect."
Point out the ambiguity. Show how it might be removed (a) by punctuation, (b) by altering "who."
77. "I struck the man in self-defence. I explained this to the magistrate. He would not believe me. Witnesses
were called to support my statements. He committed me to prison. He had the right to do this. It is a right that
is rarely exercised in such circumstances. I remonstrated."
See (44). Insert conjunctions or connecting adverbs.
78. "He attained a very distinguished position by mere (15) perseverance and common sense, which (52) (10
a) qualities are perhaps mostly underrated, (30) though he was deficient in tact and not remarkable for general
ability."
79. "Vindictiveness, which (a) (50) is a fault, (b) and which may be defined as anger (10 a) which is caused
not by sin nor by crime but by personal injury, ought to be carefully distinguished from resentment, which (a)
(50) is a virtue, (b) and which is anger (49) which is natural and (c) right caused by an act (d) which is
unjust, because it is unjust, (30 a) not because it is inconvenient."
(a) "The fault of vindictiveness;" "the virtue of resentment." (b) Omit (c) "Right" cannot be used as an
adjective, but "righteous" can. (d) "an act of injustice."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
39


===== PAGE 40 =====
80. "(a) He told his friend that (a) his brother was surprised that (a) he had given so small a contribution, for
(a) he was (b) (12) a very rich man, in spite of (a) his recent losses and the bad state of trade, (19) (30)
compared with himself."
(a) Use (6). (b) What Asian king was proverbial for wealth?
81. "(a) (15 b) It must be indeed wrong to (a) crucify a Roman citizen if to (b) (32) slay one is almost
parricide, to (b) scourge him is a monstrous crime, and to (b) bind him is an outrage."
(a) "What must it be...?" (b) See (40).
82. "The universal (54) opinion of all the citizens was that the citadel had been (15) betrayed, (30) having
been captured in broad daylight by a very small number of the enemy, and those unprovided with scaling
ladders, and admitted by a postern gate, (15 a) and much wearied by a long march."
In any case "betrayed" must come at the end of a sentence. The sentence may be converted into two sentences:
"The citadel had been captured.... Naturally therefore ...;" or, "The opinion ... for it had been captured...." Else,
if one sentence be used, write "As the citadel had been captured &c."
83. "This author surpassed all those who were living (a) at the same time with him in the forcible (b) manner
in which he could address (c) an appeal to the popular sympathy, and in the ease with which he could draw
towards (a) himself the hearts of his readers."
(a) Express in one word. (b) "force with." (c) Omit.
84. "This great statesman was indeed a pillar of commerce, and a star in the financial world. He guided or
impelled the people from the quicksands of Protection and false political economy to the safe harbour of Free
Trade; and (a) (14 a) saved the country several millions."
(a) It would be well to literalize the preceding metaphors. Else the literal statement must be changed into a
metaphor.
85. "The ministers were most unwilling to meet the Houses, (a) (43) (51) because even the boldest of them
(though their counsels were lawless (15) and desperate) had too much value for his (b) (11) personal safety to
think of resorting to the (c) (12) unlawful modes of extortion that had been familiar to the preceding age."
(a) Begin a new sentence with "Lawless and desperate though their counsels had been &c." (b) "neck." (c)
Insert some of these unlawful modes, "benevolences, ship-money, and the other &c."
86. "We will not (a) (15) pretend to guess what our grandchildren may think of the character of Lord Byron,
as exhibited in (15 a) his poetry." No writer ever had the whole eloquence of scorn, misanthropy, and (a) (15)
despair (15 a) so completely at his command. That fountain (b) (12) of bitterness was never dry."
(a) "We will not pretend to guess" and "despair" are intended by the author to be emphatic. (b) "Marah."
87. "The captain asked to be allowed fifty men, a supply of food, and one hundred and fifty breech-loaders.
(44) The general replied coldly that he could not let his subordinate have (a) (4) anything that he wanted. (44)
The captain was forced to set out (34) with an insufficient force, spite of the superabundance of soldiers doing
nothing in the camp (34), and with every obstacle put in his way by a general who from the first had resolved
not even to give him ordinary assistance, (b) (10 a') which the captain had for some time anticipated."
(a) Point out and remove the ambiguity. (b) Write, according to the meaning, " ... assistance that" or " ... a
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
40


===== PAGE 41 =====
resolution that."
88. "I am a practical man, and disbelieve in everything (8) which is not practical; theories (a) which amuse
philosophers and pedants have no attractions for me, (30) for this reason."
(a) What difference in the meaning would be caused by the use of "that" for the second "which"?
89. "Yet, when that discovery drew no other severity but the (11 a) turning (a) him out of office, and the (11 a)
passing a sentence (b) condemning him to die for it (31) (which was presently pardoned, and he was after a
short confinement restored to his liberty), all men believed that the king knew of the letter, (c) (43) and that (6
b) the pretended confession of the secretary was only collusion to lay the jealousies of the king's (d) (11 a)
favouring popery, (e) (43) which still hung upon him, (30) notwithstanding his (e) writing on the Revelation,
and his (e) affecting to enter on all occasions into controversy, (e) asserting in particular that the Pope was
Antichrist."
(a) "expulsion from." (b) "a pretended sentence to death--a pretence that was soon manifested by his pardon
and liberation." (c) Begin a new sentence: "'The secretary's pretended confession,' it was said, 'was &c.'" (d)
"the suspicion that the king favoured Popery." (e) The juxtaposition of the two verbal nouns, "writing" and
"affecting," with the participle "asserting," is harsh. Write, "For, notwithstanding that he affected controversy,
and attacked the Pope as Antichrist in his treatise on the Book of Revelation, the king was still suspected."
90. "The opinion that the sun is fixed was once too (a) (1) universal to be easily shaken, and a similar
prejudice has often (b) rendered the progress of new inventions (15 a) very slow, (19) arising from the
numbers of the believers, and not (36) the reasonableness of the belief."
(a) Write "general." Show the absurdity of appending "too" to "universal." (b) What single word can be
substituted for "rendered slow"?
91. "The rest of the generals were willing to surrender unconditionally, (30) depressed by this unforeseen
calamity; (4) only the young colonel, who retained his presence of mind, represented to them that they were
increasing the difficulties of a position in itself very difficult (19) (15, a) by their conduct."
92. "To (a) (31) an author who is, in his expression of any sentiment, wavering between the (b) demands of
perspicuity and energy (of which the (c) (40 a) former of course requires the first care, lest (40 a) he should
fail of both), and (37) doubting whether the (d) phrase which (8) has (e) the most force and brevity will be (f)
readily taken (g) in, it may (h) (3) be recommended to use both (d) expressions; first, (h) to expound the sense
sufficiently to be clearly understood, and then (i) to contract it into the most compendious and striking form."
(a) Write "When an author &c." (b) Can be omitted. (c) Assimilate the constructions: "Of which the former
must, of course, be aimed at first, lest both be missed." (d) Use "expression" or else "phrase" in both places.
(e) Assimilate the construction to what follows; write "that is most forcible and brief." (f) Insert "also." (g)
"understood." (h) "let him use ...; first let him expound." (i) Omit.
93. "When I say 'a great man,' I not (22) only mean a man intellectually great but also morally, (38) who (8)
has no preference for diplomacy (a) (23) at all events which (10 a) is mean, petty, and underhanded to secure
ends which (8) can be secured by an honest policy equally (20) well, (38) who (8) does not resemble Polonius,
(b) who prefers to get at truth by untruthful tricks, and (b) who considers truth a carp which (10 g) is to be
caught by the bait falsehood. We cannot call a petty intriguer great (c), (30) though we may be forced to call
an unscrupulous man by that (15 a) name."
(a) "at all events no preference." (b) Why is who right here? If you like, you can write, "does not, like
Polonius, prefer ... and consider." (c) End with "we cannot give the name to a petty intriguer."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
41


===== PAGE 42 =====
94. "I regret that I have some (a) (3) intelligence which (10 a) is of a most (3) painful nature, and which I
must tell you at once, though (b) I should like to defer it on (c) (40 a) account of your ill-health, and because
(c) (40 a) you have already had many troubles, and (40 a) owing to the natural dislike which (8) a friend must
always feel to say that (10 f) which is unpleasant. Many old friends in this district have turned against you: I
scarcely like to write the words: only (21) I remain faithful to you, and I am sure you will believe that I am
doing that (10 f) which is best for your interests."
(a) "news." (b) In a letter these words should remain is they are; but if a period is desired, they must (30)
come last, after "unpleasant." (c) Write "because of your ill-health ... and the troubles ... and because of...."
95. "The general at once sent back word that the enemy had suddenly appeared on the other side of the river,
and [(35) or (37)] then (a) retreated. (b) It was thought that (b) it would have shown more (c) (1) fortitude on
his (3) part if he had attacked the fortifications, (d) which were not tenable for more than a week at all events.
Such was the (54) universal opinion, at (23) least, of (54) all the soldiers."
(a) Point out the ambiguity. (b) "It was thought he would have shown &c." (c) Distinguish between "fortitude"
and "bravery." (d) What would be the meaning if "that" were substituted for "which"? It will be perhaps better
to substitute for "which," "since they."
96. "A notion has sprung up that the Premier, though he can legislate, cannot govern, and has attained an
influence which renders it imperative, if this Ministry is to go on, that (a) it should be dispersed."
(a) Who or what "has attained"? Write "and this notion has become so powerful that, unless it is dispersed...."
97. "Those who are habitually silent (a) (3) by disposition and morose are less liable to the fault of
exaggerating than those who are habitually (a) (3) fond of talking, and (40 a) of (a) (3) a pleasant
disposition."
(a) Each of these periphrases must be condensed into a single adjective.
98. "This author, (a) (31) though he is not (b) altogether (c) guiltless of (b) occasional (c) faults of
exaggeration, which are to be found as plentifully in his latest works as in those which he (d) published when
he was beginning his career as an author, yet, notwithstanding these (e) defects, surpassed all those who were
living at the (f) same time with him in the clear (g) manner in which he could, as it were, see into the feelings
of the people at large, and in the power--a power that indeed could not be (f) resisted--with which he drew (f)
toward himself the sympathy of those who (f) perused his works." See (54).
(a) Convert the parenthesis into a separate sentence. (b) One of these words is unnecessary. (c) One of these is
unnecessary. (d) Condense: "his earliest." (e) Omit these words as unnecessary. (f) Express all this in one
word. (g) "clearness with."
99. "Among the North (a) (23) American Indians I had indeed heard of the perpetration of similar atrocities;
but it seemed intolerable that such things should occur in a civilized land: and I rushed from the room at once,
leaving the wretch where he stood, with his tale half told, (30) horror-stricken at his crime."
(a) Make it evident whether the speaker once lived among the North American Indians, or not, and show who
is "horror-stricken."
100. "His (1) bravery under this painful operation and the (1) fortitude he had shown in heading the last
charge in the recent action, (30) though he was wounded at the time and had been unable to use his right arm,
and was the only officer left in his regiment, out of twenty who were alive the day before, (19) inspired every
one with admiration."
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
42


===== PAGE 43 =====
Begin, "Out of twenty officers &c.... Though wounded &c.... he had headed." "The bravery he had then shown
and...."
101. "Moral as well as (41) other considerations must have weight when we are selecting an officer (a) that
(10 b) will be placed in a position that will task his intelligence (b) (18) and his fidelity."
(a) The repetition of "that" is objectionable. Use "to fill." (b) "and" can be replaced by some other conjunction
to suit what precedes.
102. "It happened that at this time there were a few Radicals in the House who (8) could not forgive the Prime
Minister for being a Christian."
Point out the difference of meaning, according as we read "who" or "that."
103. "It cannot be doubted (15 b) that the minds of a vast number of men would be left poor shrunken things,
full of melancholy and indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves, if (32) there were taken out of men's
minds vain opinions, false valuations, imaginations as one (a) would, and the (15 a) like."
(a) The meaning (which cannot easily be more tersely expressed than in the original) is "castles in the air,"
"pleasant fancies."
104. "God never wrought a miracle to refute atheism, because His ordinary works refute it. (a) A little
philosophy inclines man's mind to atheism: depth in philosophy brings men's minds back to religion. (44)
While the mind of man looks upon second causes scattered, it may sometimes rest in them; (44) when it
beholds the chain of them confederate and linked together, it must needs acknowledge a Providence. (44) That
school which is most accused of atheism most clearly demonstrates the truth of religion."
(a) Insert a suspensive conjunction. See (34).
105. "The spirit of Liberty and the spirit of Nationality were once for all dead; (a) (5) it might be for a time a
pious duty, but it could not continue always expedient or (c) (15) (18) profitable to (b) (13) mourn (c) (15 a)
for their loss. Yet this is the (b) (13) feeling of the age of Trajan."
(a) Omit. (b) "To sit weeping by their grave;" "attitude." (c) Notice that "expedient or profitable" are
emphatic, as is shown by "yet" in the next sentence. Make it evident therefore, by their position, that these
words are more emphatic than "to mourn &c."
106. "(a) If we ask (15 b) what was the nature of the force by which this change was effected, (a) we find it to
have been (b) the force that had seemed almost dead for many generations--(38) of theology."
(a) Omit these words. (b) Begin a new sentence: "It was a force &c."
107. "I remember Longinus highly recommends a description of a storm by Homer, because (a) (5) (c) he has
not amused himself with little fancies upon the occasion, as authors of an inferior genius, whom he mentions,
(b) (15 a) have done, (30) but (c) because he has gathered together those (d) (1) events which are the most apt
to terrify the imagination, and (35) really happen in the raging of a tempest."
(a) "The poet." (b) Omit "have done" and write "like some authors." (c) Suspend the sentence by writing "the
poet ... instead of ... has." (d) What is the word for "that which happens around one, or in connection with
some central object?"
108. "To have passed (a) (3) in a self-satisfied manner through twenty years of office, letting things take their
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
43


===== PAGE 44 =====
own course; to have (b) sailed with consummate sagacity, never against the tide of popular (c) judgement; to
have left on record as the sole title to distinction among English ministers a peculiar art of (d) sporting with
the heavy, the awful responsibility of a nation's destiny with the jaunty grace of a juggler (11) (e) playing with
his golden ball; to have joked and intrigued, and bribed and (f) deceived, with the result of having done
nothing (g), (h) either for the poor, (h) or for religion (for (i) which indeed he did worse than nothing), (h) or
for art and science, (h) or for the honour or concord or even the financial prosperity of the nation, (38) is
surely a miserable basis on which the reputation of a great (15) statesman can be (k) (15 a) founded."
(a) "complacently." (b) "Sail" implies will and effort: use a word peculiar to a helpless ship, so as to contrast
paradoxically with "sagacity." (c) Use a word implying less thought and deliberation. (d) With is too often
repeated; write "bearing" so as to introduce the illustration abruptly. (e) "tossing." (f) Use a word implying a
particular kind of "deceit," not "lying," but the next thing to "lying." (g) Insert the word with a preceding and
intensifying adverb, "absolutely nothing." (h) Instead of "either," "or," repeat "nothing." (i) The parenthesis
breaks the rhythm. Write "nothing, or worse than nothing." (k) "to found."
109. "A glance at the clock will make you (1) conscious that it is nearly three in the morning, and I therefore
ask you, gentlemen, instead of wasting more time, to put this question to yourselves, 'Are we, or are we not,
here, for the purpose of (1) eliminating the truth?'"
110. "The speech of the Right Honourable member, so far from unravelling (14) the obscurities of this knotty
question, is eminently calculated to mislead his supporters (a) (8 a) who have not made a special study of it. It
may be (b) (23) almost asserted of every statement (8) which he has made that the very (1) converse is the
fact."
(a) The meaning appears to be, not "all his supporters," but "those of his supporters who:" the convenience of
writing "his supporters that" is so great that I should be disposed to use "that." (b) "Every," not "asserted,"
requires the juxtaposition of "almost."
111. "The provisions of the treaty which (8) require the consent of the Parliament of Canada await its
assembling."
Point out the meaning conveyed by which, and by that.
112. "Mrs. Smith demonstrated (26), in opposition to the general dictum of the press, that (a) there had been a
reaction against woman's suffrage, that there had really been a gain of one vote in the House of Commons."
(a) Substitute "instead of," and erase the second "that."
113. "The practice of smoking hangs like a gigantic (14 a) cloud of evil over the country."
FOOTNOTES:
[18] That which treats of the thirteenth century.
CONTINUOUS EXERCISES.
CLEARNESS.
The following exercises consist of extracts from Burnet, Butler, and Clarendon, modernized and altered with a
view to remove obscurity and ambiguity. The modernized version will necessarily be inferior to the original in
unity of style, and in some other respects. The charm of the author's individuality, and the pleasant ring of the
old-fashioned English, are lost. It is highly necessary that the student should recognize this, and should bear in
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
44


===== PAGE 45 =====
mind that the sole object is to show how the meaning in each case might have been more clearly expressed.
Occasionally expressions have been altered, not as being in themselves obscure or objectionable, but as
indicating a habit of which beginners should beware. For example, in the extract from Burnet, he is often
altered, not because, in the particular context, the pronoun presents any obscurity, but because Burnet's habit
of repeating he is faulty.
These exercises can be used in two ways. The pupil may either have his book open and be questioned on the
reasons for each alteration, or, after studying the two versions, he may have the original version dictated to
him, and then he may reproduce the parallel version, or something like it, on paper.
LORD CLARENDON.
The principal faults in this style are, long heterogeneous sentences (43), use of phrases for words (47 a),
ambiguous use of pronouns (5), excessive separation of words grammatically connected together (19).
ORIGINAL VERSION. PARALLEL VERSION.
(44) It will not be impertinent And now, in order to explain, as nor unnatural to this (50) far as possible, how
so prodigious present discourse, to set down an alteration could take place in in this place the present temper
so short a time, and how the[19] and constitution of both Houses royal power could fall so low as of
Parliament, and (34) of the to be unable to support itself, court itself, (30) that (5) it its dignity, or its faithful
may be the less wondered at, that servants, it will be of use to set so prodigious an alteration should down
here, where it comes most be made in so short a time, and naturally, some account of the[20] (37) the crown
fallen so low, that present temper and composition, it could neither support itself not only of both Houses of
nor its own majesty, nor those Parliament, but also of the court who would (47 a) appear itself. faithful to it.
* * * * * * * * * *
(Here follows a description of the House of Lords.)
In the House of Commons were many In the House of Commons persons of wisdom and gravity, who there
were many men of wisdom (7) being possessed of great and and judgment whose high plentiful fortunes,
though they position and great wealth disposed were undevoted enough to the them, in spite of their
indifference court, (19) had all imaginable to the court, to feel duty for the king, and affection a most loyal
respect for the to the government established(47 king, and a great affection for a) by law or ancient custom;
the ancient constitutional (43) and without doubt, the major government of the country. Indeed, part of that
(54) body it cannot be doubted that consisted of men who had no mind the majority had no intention to to
break the peace of the kingdom, break the peace of the kingdom or to make any considerable or to make any
considerable alteration in the government of alteration in Church or State. Church or State: (43) and
Consequently, from the very therefore (18) all inventions outset, it was necessary to resort were set on foot
from the (15) to every conceivable device beginning to work upon (5) for the purpose of perverting them, and
(11) corrupt (5) this honest majority into rebellion. them, (43) (45) by suggestions "of the dangers (8) which
With some, the appeal was threatened all that was precious addressed to their patriotism. to the subject (19) in
their They were warned "of the liberty and their property, by dangers that threatened [all overthrowing (47 a)
or that was precious in] the liberty overmastering the law, and (47 and property of the subject, a) subjecting it
to an if the laws were to be made arbitrary (47a) power, and by subservient to despotism, and countenancing
Popery to the if Popery was to be encouraged subversion of the Protestant to the subversion of the Protestant
religion," and then, by religion." infusing terrible apprehensions into some, and so working upon The fears of
others were appealed their fears, (6 b) "of (11 a) to. "There was danger," so[21] it being called in question for
was said, "that they might be somewhat they had done," by which called to account for something (5) they
would stand in need of they had done, and they would then (5) their protection; and (43) stand in need of the
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
45


===== PAGE 46 =====
help of those (45) raising the hopes of others, who were now giving them this "that, by concurring (47 a)
timely warning." In others, hopes with (5) them (5) they were excited, and offices, should be sure to obtain
offices honours, and preferments were held and honours and any kind of out as the reward of adhesion.
preferment." Though there were too Too many were led away by one or many corrupted and misled by these
other of these temptations, and several temptations, and (19) indeed some needed no other others (40 a) who
needed no temptation than their innate other temptations than from the fierceness and barbarity and the
fierceness and barbarity of malice they had contracted against their (47 a) own natures, and the Church and
the court. But the the malice they had contracted leaders of the conspiracy were not against the Church and
against the many. The flock was large and court; (43) yet the number was not submissive, but the shepherds
were great of those in whom the very few. government of the rest (47 a) was vested, nor were there many who
had the absolute authority (13) to lead, though there were a multitude (13) that was disposed to follow.
(44) (30) Mr. Pym was looked upon Of these, Mr. Pym was thought as the man of greatest experience superior
to all the rest in in parliaments, where he had parliamentary experience. To this (50) served very long, and was
advantage he added habits of always (50) a man of business, business acquired from his (7) being an officer
in the continuous service in the Exchequer, (43) and of a good Exchequer. He had also a good reputation
generally, (30) though reputation generally; for, though known to be inclined to the known to be inclined to
the Puritan party; yet not of those Puritan party, yet he was not so furious resolutions against the fanatically
set against the Church Church as the other leading men as the other leaders. In this were, and (44) wholly
devoted to respect he resembled the Earl of the Earl of Bedford, who had Bedford, to whom he was nothing of
that spirit. thoroughly devoted.
(Here follow descriptions of Hampden and Saint John.)
It was generally believed that These three persons, with the these three persons, with the three peers
mentioned before, were other three lords mentioned united in the closest confidence, before, were of the most
intimate and formed the mainspring of the and entire trust with each other, party. Such at least was the and
made the engine which (47 general belief. But it was clear a) moved all the rest; (30) that they also admitted to
their yet it was visible, that (15) unreserved confidence two others, Nathaniel Fiennes, the second son (45)
whom I will now of the Lord Say, and Sir Harry describe,--Nathaniel Fiennes, Vane, eldest son to the
Secretary, second son of Lord Say, and Sir and Treasurer of the House, were Harry Vane, eldest son of the
received by them with full Secretary, and Treasurer of the confidence and without reserve. House.
The former, being a man of good Nathaniel Fiennes, a man of good parts of learning, and after some parts,
was educated at New years spent in New College in College, Oxford, where[22] his Oxford, (43) of which his
father family claimed and enjoyed some had been formerly fellow, (43) privileges in virtue of their that family
pretending[23] and kindred to the founder, and enjoying many privileges there, as where[22] his father had
formerly of kin to the founder, (43) (19) been a fellow. He afterwards spent had spent his time abroad in some
time in Geneva and in the Geneva and amongst the cantons of cantons of Switzerland, where[22] Switzerland,
(30) where he he increased that natural improved his disinclination to the antipathy to the Church which he
Church, with which milk he had had imbibed almost with his been nursed. From his travels he mother's
milk.[24] By a singular returned through Scotland (52) coincidence, he came home through (which[24] few
travellers took in Scotland (not a very common route their way home) at the time when for returning
travellers) just (5) that rebellion was in bud: when the Scotch rebellion was in (30) (43) (44) and was very
little bud. For some time he was scarcely known, except amongst (5) that known beyond the narrow and
people, which conversed (47 a) exclusive circle of his sect, wholly amongst themselves, until until at last he
appeared in he was now (15) found in Parliament. Then, indeed, it was Parliament, (30) (43) (44) when
quickly discovered that he was it was quickly discovered that, likely to fulfil even the fond as he was the
darling of his hopes of his father and the high father, so (5) he was like to promise of many years. make good
whatsoever he had for many years promised.
(5) The other, Sir H. Vane, was Fiennes' coadjutor, Sir H. Vane, a man of great natural parts[25] was a man of
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
46


===== PAGE 47 =====
great natural (45) and of very profound ability.[25] Quick in understanding dissimulation, of a quick and
impenetrable in dissembling, conception, and of very ready, he could also speak with sharp, and weighty
expression. He promptness, point, and weight. His had an (50) unusual aspect, which, singular appearance,
though it though it might naturally proceed might naturally proceed from his from his father and mother,
parents, who were not noted for neither of which were beautiful their beauty, yet impressed men persons, yet
(19) made men think with the belief that he had in him there was somewhat in him of something
extraordinary, an extraordinary: and (52) his whole impression that was confirmed by life made good that
imagination. the whole of his life. His Within a very short time after he behaviour at Oxford, where he
returned from his studies in studied at Magdalen College, was Magdalen College in Oxford, where, not
characterized, in spite of the (43) though he was under the care supervision of a very worthy of a very worthy
tutor, he lived tutor, by a severe morality. Soon not with great exactness, (43) he after leaving Oxford he spent
some spent some little time in France, little time in France, and more in and more in Geneva, and, (43)
Geneva. After returning to after his return into England, England, he conceived an intense (38) contracted a
full prejudice hatred not only against the and bitterness against the Church, government of the Church, which
both against the form of the was disliked by many, but also government and the Liturgy, (43) against the
Liturgy, which was which was generally in great held in great and general reverence, (15 a) even with
reverence. many of those who were not friends to (5) the other. In Incurring or seeming to incur, by his
giddiness, which then much his giddiness, the displeasure of displeased, or seemed to his father, who at that
time, displease, (30) (43) his father, beside strictly conforming to the who still appeared highly Church
himself, was very bitter conformable, and exceedingly sharp against Nonconformists, the young against those
who were not, Vane left his home for New (5) he transported himself into England. New England, (43) a
colony within few years before planted by a This colony had been planted a few mixture of all religions,[26]
which years before by men of all sorts of disposed the professors to dislike religions, and their the government
of the Church; who differences[26] disposed them to (30) (43) (44) were qualified by dislike the government
of the the king's charter to choose their Church. Now, it happened that their own government and governors,
privilege (accorded by the king's under the obligation, "that every charter) of choosing their own man should
take the oaths of government and governors was allegiance and supremacy;" (30) subject to this obligation,
"that (43) (5) which all the first every man should take the oaths of planters did, when they received allegiance
and supremacy." These their charter, before they oaths had been taken, not only by transported themselves
from hence, all the original planters, on nor was there in many years after receiving their charter, before the
least scruple amongst them of leaving England, but also for many complying with those obligations: years
afterwards, without exciting so far men were, in the infancy the slightest scruple. Indeed, (15) of their schism,
from scruples against lawful oaths were refusing to take lawful oaths. unknown[27] in the infancy of the (45)
He was no sooner landed English schism. But with the there, but his parts made him arrival of Vane all this
was quickly taken notice of, (26) and changed. No sooner had he landed very probably his quality, being than
his ability, and perhaps to the eldest son of a some extent his position, as eldest Privy-councillor, might give
him son of a Privy-councillor, some advantage; insomuch (51) recommended him to notice: and at that, when
the next season came the next election he was chosen for the election of their Governor. magistrates, he was
chosen their governor: (30) (45) (43) in which In his new post, his restless and place he had so ill fortune (26)
unquiet imagination found (his working and unquiet fancy opportunity for creating and raising and infusing a
thousand diffusing a thousand conscientious scruples of conscience, which (5) scruples that had not been
brought they had not brought over with over, or ever even heard of, by the them, nor heard of before) (19)
colonists. His government proved a that he unsatisfied with failure: and, mutually them and they with him,
dissatisfied, (45) governed and he retransported himself governor parted. Vane returned into England; (30)
(43) (44) to England, but not till he had having sowed such seed of accomplished his mischievous task,
dissension there, as grew up too not till he had sown the seeds of prosperously, and miserably those miserable
dissensions which divided the poor colony into afterwards grew only too several factions, and divisions
prosperously, till they split the and persecutions of each (15 a) wretched colony into distinct, other, (30) (43)
which still hostile, and mutually persecuting continue to the great (54) factions. His handiwork still prejudice
of that plantation: remains, and it is owing to (15) insomuch as some of (5) them, him that some of the
colonists, upon the ground of their first on the pretext of liberty of expedition, liberty of conscience,
conscience, the original cause of have withdrawn themselves from (5) their emigration, have withdrawn their
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
47


===== PAGE 48 =====
jurisdiction, and obtained themselves from the old colonial other charters from the king, by jurisdiction and
have obtained which, (30) (43) in other forms of fresh charters from the king. government, they have enlarged
These men have established new their plantations, within new forms of government, unduly limits adjacent to
(5) (15 a) enlarged their boundaries, and set the other.their plantations, up rival settlements on the within new
limits adjacent to (5) borders of the original colony. (15 a) the other.
FOOTNOTES:
[19] The original metaphor uses the crown as a prop, which seems a confusion. Though the metaphor is so
common as scarcely to be regarded as a metaphor, it is better to avoid the appearance of confusion.
[20] We sometimes say, briefly but not perhaps idiomatically, "the then sovereign," "the then temper," &c.
[21] The personality of the tempters and organizers of the conspiracy is purposely kept in the background.
[22] The relative is retained in the first two cases, because it conveys the reason why Fiennes was educated at
New College; and in the third case, because the increased "antipathy" is regarded as the natural consequence
of the residence in Calvinistic Geneva.
[23] Claiming.
[24] An insinuation of sedition seems intended.
[25] This sentence is a preliminary summary of what follows.
[26] If "which" is used here according to Rule (8), the meaning is, (a) "and their differences;" if it is used for
"that," the meaning will be, (b) "all religions that were of a nature to dispose &c." I believe (a) is the meaning;
but I have found difference of opinion on the question.
[27] The following words appear to be emphatic, bringing out the difference between the infancy and the
development of schism.
BURNET.
The principal faults in Burnet's style are (a) the use of heterogeneous sentences (see 43); (b) the want of
suspense (see 30); (c) the ambiguous use of pronouns (see 5); (d) the omission of connecting adverbs and
conjunctions, and an excessive use of and (see 44); and (e) an abruptness in passing from one topic to another
(see 45). The correction of these faults necessarily lengthens the altered version.
ORIGINAL VERSION. PARALLEL VERSION.
And his maintaining the honour of He also gratified the English the nation in all foreign feeling of self-respect
by countries gratified the (1) maintaining the honour of the vanity which is very natural nation in all foreign
countries. (50) to Englishmen; (30) (43) of So jealous was he on this point which he was so (15) (17 a) that,
though he was not a crowned careful that, though he was not head, he yet secured for his a crowned head, yet
his (40 a) ambassadors all the respect that ambassadors had all the respects had been paid to the ambassadors
paid them which our (15) kings' of our kings. The king, he said, ambassadors ever had: he said (6 received
respect simply as the b) the dignity of the crown nation's representative head, was upon the account of the and,
since the nation was the nation, of which the king was same, the same respect should (50) only the
representative be paid to the[28] nation's head; so, the nation being the ministers. same, he would have the
same regards paid to (41) his ministers.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
48


===== PAGE 49 =====
Another[29] instance of (5) this The following instance of jealousy pleased him much. Blake with the for the
national honour pleased fleet happened (50) to be at him much. When Blake was at Malaga Malaga before he
made war upon with his fleet, before his war Spain: (44) and some of his with Spain, it happened that some
seamen went ashore, and met the of his sailors going ashore and Host carried about; (44) and not meeting the
procession of the only paid no respect to it, but Host, not only paid no respect to laughed at those who did;
(43) it, but even laughed at those who (30) (51) so one of the priests did. Incited by one of the priests put the
people upon resenting this to resent the indignity, the indignity; and they fell upon people fell on the scoffers
and (5) them and beat them severely. beat them severely. On their When they returned to their ship return to
the ship the seamen (5) they complained of (5) complained of this ill-usage, this usage; and upon that Blake
whereupon Blake sent a messenger sent a trumpet to the viceroy to to the viceroy to demand the demand the
priest who was the priest who was the instigator of chief (1) instrument in that the outrage. The viceroy
answered ill-usage. The viceroy answered that he could not touch him, as he he had no authority over the had
no authority over the priests. (15) priests, and so could not To this Blake replied, that he did dispose of him.
Blake upon that not intend to inquire to whom the sent him word that he would not authority belonged, but, if
the inquire who had the (1) power to priest were not sent within three send the priest to him, but if hours, he
would burn the town. The he were not sent within three townspeople being in no condition hours, he would
burn their town; to resist, the priest was at once (43) and (5) they, being in no sent. On his arrival, he defended
condition to resist him, sent himself, alleging the insolence of the priest to him, (43) (44) who the sailors. But
the English (50) justified himself upon the Admiral replied that a complaint petulant behaviour of the seamen.
should have been forwarded to him, and then he would have punished (44) Blake answered that, if (5) them
severely, for none of his he had sent a complaint to (5) sailors should be allowed to him of(5) it, (5) he would
affront the established religion have punished them severely, since of any place where they touched. (5) he
would not suffer his "But," he added, "I take it ill men to affront the established that you should set on your
religion of any place at which (5) countrymen to do my work; for I he touched; but (5) (6) he will have all the
world know that took it ill, that he set on the an Englishman is only to be Spaniards to do (5) it; for he
punished, by an Englishman." Then, would have all the world to know satisfied with having had the (50) that
an Englishman was only to be offender at his mercy, Blake punished by an Englishman; (43) entertained him
civilly and sent (44) and so he treated the priest him back. civilly, and sent him back (30), being satisfied that
he had him at his mercy.
Cromwell was much delighted with Cromwell was much delighted with (5) this, (43) and read the Blake's
conduct. Reading the letters in council with great letters in council with great satisfaction; and said he (6)
satisfaction, he said, "I hope I hoped he should make the name of shall make the name of an an Englishman as
great as ever Englishman as much respected as that of a Roman (15 a) had ever was the name of Roman."
been. (44) The States of Holland Among other countries the States were in such dread of (5) him that of
Holland were in such dread of they took care to give him no sort Cromwell that they took care to of umbrage;
(43) (44) and when give him no sort of umbrage. at any time the king or his Accordingly, whenever the king
or brothers came to see their sister his brothers came to see the the Princess Royal, (23) within a Princess
Royal their sister, they day or two after, (5) they used were always warned in a day or two to send a deputation
to let them by a deputation that Cromwell had know that Cromwell had required of required of the States to
give the States that (5) they should them no harbourage. give them no harbour.
* * * * * * * * * *
Cromwell's favourite alliance was The free kingdom of Sweden was Sweden.[30] (44) Carolus Gustavus
Cromwell's favourite ally; not and he lived in great conjunction only under Charles Gustavus, with of
counsels. (44) Even Algernon whom he was on most confidential Sydney, (10 a) who was not terms, but also
under Christina. inclined to think or speak well of Both these sovereigns had just kings, commended him (5)
to me; notions of public liberty; at and said he (5) had just least, Algernon Sydney, a man notions of public
liberty; (44) certainly not prejudiced in favour (43) and added, that Queen of royalty, assured me this was
Christina seemed to have them true of Gustavus. He also held the likewise. But (44) she was same opinion of
Queen Christina; much changed from that, when but, if so, she was much changed I waited on her at Rome;
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
49


===== PAGE 50 =====
for when I waited on her at Rome; for she complained of us as a factious she then complained of the factious
nation, that did not readily and unruly spirit of our nation. comply with the commands (47 a) of our princes.
(44) All Italy All Italy, no less than trembled at the name of Cromwell, Holland,[31] trembled at the name and
seemed under a (1) panic as of Cromwell, and dreaded him till long as he lived; (43) his fleet he died. Nor
durst the Turks scoured the Mediterranean; and the offend the great (50) Protector Turks durst not offend him;
but whose fleet scoured the delivered up Hyde, who kept up the Mediterranean; and they even gave character
of an ambassador from up Hyde, who, for keeping up in the king there (23) (43), and was Turkey the
character of ambassador brought over and executed for (5) from the king, was brought to it. England and
executed.
(44) (11 a) The putting the In another instance of severity brother of the king of Portugal's towards
foreigners--the execution ambassador to death for murder, of the brother of the Portuguese was (11 a)
carrying justice ambassador for murder--Cromwell very far; (43) since, though in carried justice very far. For,
the strictness of the law of though in strictness the law of nations, it is only the nations exempts from foreign
ambassador's own person that is jurisdiction the ambassador alone, exempted from (4) any authority yet in
practice the exemption has (47 a) but his master's that extended to the whole of the sends him, yet the practice
has ambassador's suite. gone in favour of all that the ambassador owned (47 a) to Successful abroad,
Cromwell was no belong to him. (41) (44) Cromwell less successful at home in showed his good (11)
selecting able and worthy men for understanding in nothing more public duties, especially for the than in
seeking[32] out capable courts of law. In nothing did he and worthy men for all employments, show more
clearly his great but most particularly for the natural insight, and nothing courts of law, (43) (30 a) contributed
more to his popularity. (10 a) which gave a general satisfaction.
FOOTNOTES:
[28] The meaning is "his, and therefore the nation's, ministers." There is a kind of antithesis between "the
nation" and "the nation's ministers."
[29] No instance has yet been mentioned.
[30] The thought that is implied, and should be expressed, by the words, is this: "Cromwell's favourite ally
was a free country."
[31] The remarks about Christina are a digression, and Burnet is now returning to the respect in which
Cromwell was held by foreign nations.
[32] He not only sought, but sought successfully. That "find" is not necessarily implied by "seek out" seems
proved by the use of the word in the Authorized Version, 2 Tim. ii. 17: "He sought me out very diligently, and
found me."
BISHOP BUTLER.
The principal faults in this style are (a) a vague use of pronouns (5), and sometimes (b) the use of a phrase,
where a word would be enough (47 a).
ORIGINAL VERSION. PARALLEL VERSION.
Some persons, (15) upon Some persons avowedly reject all pretence[33] of the sufficiency of revelation
as[34]essentially the light of Nature, avowedly incredible and necessarily reject all revelation as, in its
fictitious, on the ground that the (47 a) very notion, light of Nature is in itself incredible, and what (47 a)
sufficient. And assuredly, had the must be fictitious. And indeed light of Nature been sufficient in (32) it is
certain that no such a sense as to render revelation would have been given, revelation needless or useless, no
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
50


===== PAGE 51 =====
(32) had the light of Nature been revelation would ever have been sufficient in such a sense as to given. But
let any man consider render (5) one not[35] wanting, the spiritual darkness that once or useless. But no (15 b)
man in (41) prevailed in the heathen seriousness and simplicity can world before revelation, and that possibly
think it (5) so, who (41) still prevails in those considers the state of religion in regions that have not yet
received the heathen world before the light of revealed truth; above revelation, and its (5) present all, let him
mark not merely the state in those (11) places (8) natural inattention and ignorance which have borrowed no
light of the masses, but also the from (5) it; particularly (19) the doubtful language held even by a
doubtfulness of some of the (12) Socrates on even so vital a greatest men concerning things of subject as[36]
the immortality of the utmost (11) importance, as the soul; and then can he in well as the (15 a) natural
seriousness and sincerity maintain inattention and ignorance of that the light of Nature is mankind in general.
It is (34) sufficient? impossible to say (12) who would have been able to have reasoned It is of course
impossible to deny out that whole system which we that some second[36] Aristotle call natural religion, (30)
in its might have reasoned out, in its genuine simplicity, clear of genuine simplicity and without superstition;
but there is a touch of superstition, the certainly no ground to affirm whole of that system which we that the
generality could. call natural religion. But there (44) If they could, there is is certainly no ground for no sort of
probability that affirming that this complicated they would. (44) Admitting there process would have been
possible were, they would highly want a for ordinary men. Even if they had standing admonition to remind
them had the power, there is no of (5) it, and inculcate it upon probability that they would have them. And
further still, were (5) had the inclination; and, even if they as much disposed (47 a) we admit the probable
inclination, to attend to religion as the they would still need some better sort of men (15 a) are; standing
admonition, whereby yet, even upon this supposition, natural religion might be there would be various
occasions suggested and inculcated. Still for supernatural instruction and further, even if we suppose these
assistance, and the greatest ordinary men to be as attentive to advantages (50) might be religion as men of a
better sort, afforded (15 a) by (5) yet even then there would be them. So that, to say revelation various
occasions when is a thing superfluous, what supernatural instruction and there (47 a) was no need of,
assistance might be most and what can be of (47 a) no beneficially bestowed. service, is, I think, to talk wildly
and at random. Nor would it Therefore, to call revelation be more extravagant to affirm that superfluous,
needless, and (40 a) mankind is so entirely useless, is, in my opinion, to (40 a) at ease in the present talk
wildly and at random. A man state, and (40 a) life so might as reasonably assert that we completely (40 a)
happy, that are so entirely at ease and so (5) it is a contradiction to completely happy in this present suppose
(40 a) our condition life that our condition cannot capable of being in any respect without contradiction be
supposed (47 a) better.--(Analogy of capable of being in any way Religion, part ii. chap. 1.) improved.
FOOTNOTES:
[33] "To pretend" once meant "to put forward," "maintain."
[34] It has been suggested, however, that by "in its very notion incredible," is meant "inconceivable."
[35] "Wanting" is used for modern "wanted."
[36] This use of the particular for the general would be out of place in Butler's style, but it adds clearness.
BREVITY.
SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON.
The following extract exhibits examples of tautology and lengthiness. The "implied statement" (50) can often
be used as a remedy, but, more often, the best remedy is omission.
ORIGINAL VERSION. PARALLEL VERSION.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
51


===== PAGE 52 =====
The Russian empire is (50) a Russia, with her vast strength and state of (54) such vast boundless resources, is
obviously strength and boundless destined to exercise on the course resources, that it is of history a great and
lasting obviously destined to make a influence. The slowness of her great and lasting impression on progress
only renders her human affairs. Its (50) progress durability more probable. The has been slow, but (5) it[37] is
Russian Empire has not, like the only on that account the more empires of Alexander the Great and likely to
be durable. (5) It has Napoleon, been raised to sudden not suddenly risen to greatness, greatness by the genius
of like the empire of Alexander in individuals or the accidents of ancient (19) (31), or that of fortune, but has
been slowly Napoleon in modern, times, from enlarged and firmly consolidated the force of individual genius,
or by well-guided ambition and the accidents of (54) casual persevering energy,[38] during a fortune, but has
slowly advanced, long succession of ages. and (40 a) been firmly consolidated (15) during a succession of
ages, from the combined influence of ambition skilfully directed and energy (15 a) perseveringly applied.
* * * * * * * * * *
The extent and fertility of the The extent and fertility of her Russian territory are such (54) territory furnish
unparalleled as to furnish facilities of facilities for the increase of her increase and elements of strength
population and power. European which no nation (47 a) in the Russia, that is, Russia to the world enjoys.
European west of the Ural Mountains, Russia--that is, Russia to the contains one million two hundred
westward of the Ural thousand square geographical Mountains--contains a hundred and miles, or ten times the
surface of fifty thousand four hundred square Great Britain and Ireland. marine leagues, or about one million
two hundred thousand square geographical miles, being ten times the surface of the British Islands, which
contain, including Ireland, one hundred and twenty-two thousand. Great part, This vast territory is intersected
no doubt, of this immense (54, by no mountain ranges, no arid see below) territory is covered deserts; and
though much of it is with forests, or (40 a) lies rendered almost unproductive of so far to the north as to be
food either by the denseness of almost unproductive of food; but forests, or by the severity of the no ranges of
mountains or arid northern winter, yet almost all, deserts intersect the vast (54, except that part which touches
see above) extent, and almost the Arctic snows, is capable of the whole, excepting that which yielding
something for the use touches the Arctic snows, is of man. capable of yielding something for the use of man.
The (3) (54) The steppes of the south present boundless steppes of the south an inexhaustible pasturage to
present (54) inexhaustible those nomad tribes whose numerous fields of pasturage, and give and incomparable
horsemen form the birth to those nomad tribes, in chief defence of the empire. whose numerous and
incomparable horsemen the chief defence of the empire,[39] as of all Oriental states, (15 a) is to be found. The
rich arable lands in the heart The rich arable lands in the of the (54) empire produce an interior produce grain
enough to (2) incalculable quantity of support four times the present grain, capable not only of population of
the empire, and yet maintaining four times (5) its leave a vast surplus to be present inhabitants, but affording
transported by the Dnieper, the a vast surplus for exportation by Volga, and their tributaries, into the Dnieper,
the Volga, and their the Euxine or other seas. tributary streams, (30) which form so many (54) natural outlets
into the Euxine or other seas; (44) while the cold and Lastly, the cold bleak plains shivering plains which
stretch stretching towards Archangel and towards Archangel and the shores towards the shores of the White of
the White Sea are (48) covered Sea, and covered with immense with immense forests of fir and forests of oak
and fir, furnish oak, furnishing at once (54)[40] materials for shipbuilding and inexhaustible materials for
supplies of fuel that will for shipbuilding and supplies of fuel. many generations supersede the (54) These
ample stores for many necessity of searching for coal. generations will supersede the necessity of searching in
the (14 a) bowels of the earth for the purposes of (54) warmth or manufacture.
Formidable as the power of Russia Much as we may dread Russia for is from the vast extent of its the vastness
of her territory and territory, and the great and of her rapidly increasing numbers, rapidly increasing number of
there is greater cause for fear its (54) subjects, (5) it is in the military spirit and the still more (5) so from the
docility of her people. military spirit and docile disposition by which they are (54)[41] distinguished. The
prevailing (54) passion of the A burning thirst for conquest is nation is the (54) love of as prevalent a passion
in Russia conquest, and this (54) ardent as democratic ambition in the free (54) desire, which (54) burns
states of Western Europe. This as (54) fiercely in them as passion is the unseen spring[2] democratic ambition
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
52


===== PAGE 53 =====
does in the which, while it retains the free states of Western Europe, is Russians in the strictest the unseen
spring[42] which both discipline, unceasingly impels retains them submissive (54) their united forces against
all under the standard of their adjoining states. chief and impels their accumulated forces in ceaseless The
national energy, which is as violence over all the adjoining great as the national territory, states. The energies
of the rarely wastes itself in disputes people, great as[43] the territory about domestic grievances. For all they
inhabit, are rarely wasted in internal evils, how great soever, internal disputes. Domestic the Russians hope to
find a grievances, how great soever, are compensation, and more than a (54) overlooked in the thirst for
compensation, in the conquest of foreign aggrandizement. (15) In the world. the conquest of the world the
people hope to find a compensation, and more than a compensation, (15 a) for all the evils of their interior
administration.
FOOTNOTES:
[37] Apparently "it" means, not "progress," but the "Russian empire."
[38] Not "energy," but "a long succession of ages," needs to be emphasized.
[39] There is nothing in the context that requires the words, "as of all Oriental states."
[40] If they were really "inexhaustible," the "necessity of searching in the bowels of the earth" would be
"superseded," not for "many," but for all generations.
[41] The words can be implied, and besides they are expressed in the following sentence.
[42] The metaphor is questionable; for a "spring," qua "spring," does not retain at all; and besides, "a passion"
ought not to "burn" in one line, and be a "spring" in the next.
[43] The meaning appears not to be, "great as" (is), i.e. "though the territory is great."
THE END.
* * * * *
ENGLISH LESSONS
FOR
ENGLISH PEOPLE.
BY
THE REV. EDWIN A. ABBOTT, M.A.,
HEAD MASTER OF THE CITY OF LONDON SCHOOL;
AND
J. R. SEELEY, M.A.,
PROFESSOR OF MODERN HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
53


===== PAGE 54 =====
"It is not so much a merit to know English as it is a shame not to know it; and I look upon this knowledge as
essential for an Englishman, and not merely for a fine speaker."--ADAPTED FROM CICERO.
BOSTON: ROBERTS BROTHERS. 1883.
[Illustration: QUI LEGIT REGIT]
UNIVERSITY PRESS: JOHN WILSON & SON, CAMBRIDGE.
TO THE
REV. G. F. W. MORTIMER, D.D.,
Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral, late Head Master of the City of London School.
DEAR DOCTOR MORTIMER,
We have other motives, beside the respect and gratitude which must be felt for you by all those of your old
pupils who are capable of appreciating the work you did at the City of London School, for asking you to let us
dedicate to you a little book which we have entitled "English Lessons for English People."
Looking back upon our school life, we both feel that among the many educational advantages which we
enjoyed under your care, there was none more important than the study of the works of Shakspeare, to which
we and our school-fellows were stimulated by the special prizes of the Beaufoy Endowment.
We owe you a debt of gratitude not always owed by pupils to their teachers. Many who have passed into a life
of engrossing activity without having been taught at school to use rightly, or to appreciate the right use of,
their native tongue, feeling themselves foreigners amid the language of their country, may turn with some
point against their teachers the reproach of banished Bolingbroke:--
My tongue's use is to me no more Than an unstringed viol or a harp, Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Or, being open, put into his hands That knows no touch to tune the harmony; Within my mouth you have
engaoled my tongue, Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips, And dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance Is
made my gaoler to attend on me. I am too old to fawn upon a nurse, Too far in years to be a pupil now.
It is our pleasant duty, on the contrary, to thank you for encouraging us to study the "cunning instrument" of
our native tongue.
Our sense of the benefits which we derived from this study, and our recollection that the study was at that
time optional, and did not affect more than a small number of the pupils, lead us to anticipate that when once
the English language and literature become recognized, not as an optional but as a regular part of our
educational course, the advantages will be so great as to constitute nothing short of a national benefit.
The present seems to be a critical moment for English instruction. The subject has excited much attention of
late years; many schools have already taken it up; others are on the point of doing so; it forms an important
part of most Government and other examinations. But there is a complaint from many teachers that they
cannot teach English for want of text-books and manuals; and, as the study of English becomes year by year
more general, this complaint makes itself more and more distinctly heard. To meet this want we have written
the following pages. If we had had more time, we might perhaps have been tempted to aim at producing a
more learned and exhaustive book on the subject; but, setting aside want of leisure, we feel that a practical
text-book, and not a learned or exhaustive treatise, is what is wanted at the present crisis.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
54


===== PAGE 55 =====
We feel sure that you will give a kindly welcome to our little book, as an attempt, however imperfect, to hand
on the torch which you have handed to us; we beg you also to accept it as a token of our sincere gratitude for
more than ordinary kindnesses, and to believe us
Your affectionate pupils,
J. R. SEELEY. EDWIN A. ABBOTT.
* * * * *
Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications.
ENGLISH LESSONS FOR ENGLISH PEOPLE. By Rev. E. A. ABBOTT, M.A., and Prof. J. R. SEELEY,
M.A. Part I.--Vocabulary. Part II--Diction. Part III.--Metre. Part IV.--Hints on Selection and Arrangement.
Appendix. 16mo. Price $1.50.
From the London Athenæum.
The object of this book is evidently a practical one. It is intended for ordinary use by a large circle of readers;
and though designed principally for boys, may be read with advantage by many of more advanced years. One
of the lessons which it professes to teach, "to use the right word in the right place," is one which no one
should despise. The accomplishment is a rare one, and many of the hints here given are truly admirable.
From the Southern Review.
The study of Language can never be exhausted. Every time it is looked at by a man of real ability and culture,
some new phase starts into view. The origin of Language; its relations to the mind; its history; its laws; its
development; its struggles; its triumphs; its devices; its puzzles; its ethics,--every thing about it is full of
interest.
Here is a delightful book, by two men of recognized authority,--the head Master of London School, and the
Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge, the notable author of "Ecce Homo." The book is
so comprehensive in its scope that it seems almost miscellaneous. It treats of the vocabulary of the English
Language; Diction as appropriate to this or that sort of composition; selection and arguments of topics; Metre,
and an Appendix on Logic. All this in less than three hundred pages. Within this space so many subjects
cannot be treated exhaustively; and no one is, unless we may except Metre, to which about eighty pages are
devoted, and about which all seems to be said that is worth saying,--possibly more. But on each topic some of
the best things are said in a very stimulating way. The student will desire to study more thoroughly the subject
into which such pleasant openings are here given; and the best prepared teacher will be thankful for the
number of striking illustrations gathered up to his hand.
The abundance and freshness of the quotations makes the volume very attractive reading, without reference to
its didactic value.
Sold by all booksellers. Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers,
ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON.
PREFACE.
This book is not intended to supply the place of an English Grammar. It presupposes a knowledge of
Grammar and of English idiom in its readers, and does not address itself to foreigners, but to those who,
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
55


===== PAGE 56 =====
having already a familiar knowledge of English, need help to write it with taste and exactness. Some degree of
knowledge is presumed in the reader; nevertheless we do not presume that he possesses so much as to render
him incapable of profiting from lessons. Our object is, if possible, not merely to interest, but to teach; to write
lessons, not essays,--lessons that may perhaps prove interesting to some who have passed beyond the routine
of school life, but still lessons, in the strictest sense, adapted for school classes.
Aiming at practical utility, the book deals only with those difficulties which, in the course of teaching, we
have found to be most common and most serious. For there are many difficulties, even when grammatical
accuracy has been attained, in the way of English persons attempting to write and speak correctly. First, there
is the cramping restriction of an insufficient vocabulary; not merely a loose and inexact apprehension of many
words that are commonly used, and a consequent difficulty in using them accurately, but also a total ignorance
of many other words, and an inability to use them at all; and these last are, as a rule, the very words which are
absolutely necessary for the comprehension and expression of any thought that deals with something more
than the most ordinary concrete notions. There is also a very common inability to appreciate the differences
between words that are at all similar. Lastly, where the pupil has studied Latin, and trusts too much for his
knowledge of English words to his knowledge of their Latin roots, there is the possibility of misderiving and
misunderstanding a word, owing to ignorance of the changes of letters introduced in the process of derivation;
and, on the other hand, there is the danger of misunderstanding and pedantically misusing words correctly
derived, from an ignorance of the changes of meaning which a word almost always experiences in passing
from one language to another. The result of all this non-understanding or slovenly half-understanding of
words is a habit of slovenly reading and slovenly writing, which when once acquired is very hard to shake off.
Then, following on the difficulties attending the use of words, there are others attending the choice and
arrangement of words. There is the danger of falling into "poetic prose," of thinking it necessary to write
"steed" or "charger" instead of "horse," "ire" instead of "anger," and the like; and every teacher, who has had
much experience in looking over examination papers, will admit that this is a danger to which beginners are
very liable. Again, there is the temptation to shrink with a senseless fear from using a plain word twice in the
same page, and often from using a plain word at all. This unmanly dread of simplicity, and of what is called
"tautology," gives rise to a patchwork made up of scraps of poetic quotations, unmeaning periphrases, and
would-be humorous circumlocutions,--a style of all styles perhaps the most objectionable and offensive,
which may be known and avoided by the name of Fine Writing. Lastly, there is the danger of obscurity, a fault
which cannot be avoided without extreme care, owing to the uninflected nature of our language.
All these difficulties and dangers are quite as real, and require as much attention, and are fit subjects for
practical teaching in our schools, quite as much as many points which, at present, receive perhaps an
excessive attention in some of our text-books. To use the right word in the right place is an accomplishment
not less valuable than the knowledge of the truth (carefully recorded in most English Grammars, and often
inflicted as a task upon younger pupils) that the plural of cherub is cherubim, and the feminine of bull is cow.
To smooth the reader's way through these difficulties is the object of the first three Parts of this book.
Difficulties connected with Vocabulary are considered first. The student is introduced, almost at once, to
Synonyms. He is taught how to define a word, with and without the aid of its synonyms. He is shown how to
eliminate from a word whatever is not essential to its meaning. The processes of Definition and Elimination
are carefully explained: a system or scheme is laid down which he can exactly follow; and examples are
subjoined, worked out to illustrate the method which he is to pursue. A system is also given by which the
reader may enlarge his vocabulary, and furnish himself easily and naturally with those general or abstract
terms which are often misunderstood and misused, and still more often not understood and not used at all.
Some information is also given to help the reader to connect words with their roots, and at the same time to
caution him against supposing that, because he knows the roots of a word, he necessarily knows the meaning
of the word itself. Exercises are interspersed throughout this Part which can be worked out with, or without,
an English Etymological Dictionary,[44] as the nature of the case may require. The exercises have not been
selected at random; many of them have been subjected to the practical test of experience, and have been used
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
56


===== PAGE 57 =====
in class teaching.
The Second Part deals with Diction. It attempts to illustrate with some detail the distinction--often ignored by
those who are beginning to write English, and sometimes by others also--between the Diction of Prose, and
that of Poetry. It endeavors to dissipate that excessive and vulgar dread of tautology which, together with a
fondness for misplaced pleasantry, gives rise to the vicious style described above. It gives some practical rules
for writing a long sentence clearly and impressively; and it also examines the difference between slang,
conversation, and written prose. Both for translating from foreign languages into English, and for writing
original English composition, these rules have been used in teaching, and, we venture to think, with
encouraging results.
A Chapter on Simile and Metaphor concludes the subject of Diction. We have found, in the course of
teaching, that a great deal of confusion in speaking and writing, and still more in reading and attempting to
understand the works of our classical English authors, arises from the inability to express the literal meaning
conveyed in a Metaphor. The application of the principle of Proportion to the explanation of Metaphor has
been found to dissipate much of this confusion. The youngest pupils readily learn how to "expand a Metaphor
into its Simile;" and it is really astonishing to see how many difficulties that perplex young heads, and
sometimes old ones too, vanish at once when the key of "expansion" is applied. More important still, perhaps,
is the exactness of thought introduced by this method. The pupil knows that, if he cannot expand a metaphor,
he does not understand it. All teachers will admit that to force a pupil to see that he does not understand any
thing is a great stride of progress. It is difficult to exaggerate the value of a process which makes it impossible
for a pupil to delude himself into the belief that he understands when he does not understand.
Metre is the subject of the Third Part. The object of this Part (as also, in a great measure, of the Chapter just
mentioned belonging to the Second Part) is to enable the pupil to read English Poetry with intelligence,
interest, and appreciation. To teach any one how to read a verse so as to mark the metre on the one hand,
without on the other hand converting the metrical line into a monotonous doggerel, is not so easy a task as
might be supposed. Many of the rules stated in this Part have been found of practical utility in teaching pupils
to hit the mean. Rules and illustrations have therefore been given, and the different kinds of metre and
varieties of the same metre have been explained at considerable length.
This Chapter may seem to some to enter rather too much into detail. We desire, however, to urge as an
explanation, that in all probability the study of English metre will rapidly assume more importance in English
schools. At present, very little is generally taught, and perhaps known, about this subject. In a recent elaborate
edition of the works of Pope, the skill of that consummate master of the art of epigrammatic versification is
impugned because in one of his lines he suffers the to receive the metrical accent. When one of the
commonest customs (for it is in no sense a license) of English poets--a custom sanctioned by Shakspeare,
Dryden, Milton, Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley, and Tennyson--can be censured as a fault, and this in a leading
edition of a leading poet of our literature, it must be evident that much still remains to be done in teaching
English Metre. At present this Part may seem too detailed. Probably, some few years hence, when a
knowledge of English Metre has become more widely diffused, it will seem not detailed enough.
The Fourth Part (like the Chapter on Metaphor) is concerned not more with English than with other languages.
It treats of the different Styles of Composition, the appropriate subjects for each, and the arrangement of the
subject-matter. We hope that this may be of some interest to the general reader, as well as of practical utility
in the higher classes of schools. It seems desirable that before pupils begin to write essays, imaginary
dialogues, speeches, and poems, they should receive some instruction as to the difference of arrangement in a
poem, a speech, a conversation, and an essay.
An Appendix adds a few hints on some Errors in Reasoning. This addition may interfere with the symmetry of
the book; but if it is found of use, the utility will be ample compensation. In reading literature, pupils are
continually meeting instances of false reasoning, which, if passed over without comment, do harm, and, if
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
57


===== PAGE 58 =====
commented upon, require some little basis of knowledge in the pupil to enable him to understand the
explanation. Without entering into the details of formal Logic, we have found it possible to give pupils some
few hints which have appeared to help them. The hints are so elementary, and so few, that they cannot
possibly delude the youngest reader into imagining that they are any thing more than hints. They may induce
him hereafter to study the subject thoroughly in a complete treatise, when he has leisure and opportunity; but,
in any case, a boy will leave school all the better prepared for the work of life, whatever that work may be, if
he knows the meaning of induction, and has been cautioned against the error, post hoc, ergo propter hoc. No
lesson, so far as our experience in teaching goes, interests and stimulates pupils more than this; and our
experience of debating societies, in the higher forms of schools, forces upon us the conviction that such
lessons are not more interesting than necessary.
Questions on the different paragraphs have been added at the end of the book, for the purpose of enabling the
student to test his knowledge of the contents, and also to serve as home lessons to be prepared by pupils in
classes.[45]
A desire, expressed by some teachers of experience, that these lessons should be published as soon as
possible, has rather accelerated the publication. Some misprints and other inaccuracies may possibly be found
in the following pages, in consequence of the short time Which has been allowed us for correcting them. Our
thanks are due to several friends who have kindly assisted us in this task, and who have also aided us with
many valuable and practical suggestions. Among these we desire to mention Mr. Joseph Payne, whose labors
on Norman French are well known; Mr. T.G. Philpotts, late Fellow of New College, Oxford, and one of the
Assistant Masters of Rugby School; Mr. Edwin Abbott, Head Master of the Philological School; Mr. Howard
Candler, Mathematical Master of Uppingham School; and the Rev. R. H. Quick, one of the Assistant Masters
of Harrow School.
In conclusion, we repeat that we do not wish our book to be regarded as an exhaustive treatise, or as adapted
for the use of foreigners. It is intended primarily for boys, but, in the present unsatisfactory state of English
education, we entertain a hope that it may possibly be found not unfit for some who have passed the age of
boyhood; and in this hope we have ventured to give it the title of English Lessons for English People.
FOOTNOTES:
[44] An Etymological Dictionary is necessary for pupils studying the First Part. Chambers's or Ogilvie's will
answer the purpose.
[45] Some of the passages quoted to illustrate style are intended to be committed to memory and used as
repetition-lessons.--See pp. 180, 181, 212, 237, 238, etc.
* * * * *
ON THE RIGHT USE OF BOOKS.
A LECTURE. By WILLIAM P. ATKINSON, Professor of English and History in the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. 16mo. Cloth. Price 50 cents.
"Full of good sense, sound taste, and quiet humor.... It is the easiest thing in the world to waste time over
books, which are merely tools of knowledge like any other tools.... It is the function of a good book not only
to fructify, but to inspire, not only to fill the memory with evanescent treasures, but to enrich the imagination
with forms of beauty and goodness which leave a lasting impression on the character."--N. Y. Tribune.
"Contains so many wise suggestions concerning methods in study and so excellent a summary of the nature
and principles of a really liberal education that it well deserves publication for the benefit of the reading
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
58


===== PAGE 59 =====
public. Though it makes only a slight volume, its quality in thought and style is so admirable that all who are
interested in the subject of good education will give to it a prominent and honorable position among the many
books upon education which have recently been published. For it takes only a brief reading to perceive that in
this single lecture the results of wide experience in teaching and of long study of the true principles of
education are generalized and presented in a few pages, each one of which contains so much that it might be
easily expanded into an excellent chapter."--The Library Table.
* * * * *
READING AS A FINE ART.
By ERNEST LEGOUVÉ, of the Académie Française. Translated from the Ninth Edition by ABBY
LANGDON ALGER. 16mo. Cloth. 50 cents.
(Dedication.)
TO THE SCHOLARS OF THE HIGH AND NORMAL SCHOOL.
For you this sketch was written: permit me to dedicate it to you, in fact, to intrust it to your care. Pupils
to-day, to-morrow you will be teachers; to-morrow, generation after generation of youth will pass through
your guardian hands. An idea received by you must of necessity reach thousands of minds. Help me, then, to
spread abroad the work in which you have some share, and allow me to add to the great pleasure of having
numbered you among my hearers the still greater happiness of calling you my assistants. E. LEGOUVÉ.
We commend this valuable little book to the attention of teachers and others interested in the instruction of the
pupils of our public schools. It treats of the "First Steps in Reading," "Learning to Read," "Should we read as
we talk," "The Use and Management of the Voice," "The Art of Breathing," "Pronunciation," "Stuttering,"
"Punctuation," "Readers and Speakers," "Reading as a Means of Criticism," "On Reading Poetry," &c., and
makes a strong claim as to the value of reading aloud, as being the most wholesome of gymnastics, for to
strengthen the voice is to strengthen the whole system and develop vocal power.
* * * * *
HOW TO PARSE.
AN ATTEMPT TO APPLY THE PRINCIPLES OF SCHOLARSHIP TO ENGLISH GRAMMAR. With
Appendixes in Analysis, Spelling, and Punctuation. By EDWIN A. ABBOTT, M.A., Head Master of the City
of London School. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.
"We recommend this little book to the careful attention of teachers and others interested in instruction. In the
hands of an able teacher, the book should help to relieve parsing from the reproach of being the bane of the
school-room. The Etymological Glossary of Grammatical Terms will also supply a long-felt want." N.Y.
Nation.
"'How to Parse' is likely to prove to teachers a valuable, and to scholars an agreeable, substitute for most of
the grammars in common use."--Boston Daily Advertiser.
"The Rev. E.A. Abbott, whose books, 'English Lessons for English People,' and 'How to Write Clearly,' have
been accepted as standard text-books on both sides of the ocean, has added another work to his list of sensible
treatises on the use of English. It is called 'How to Parse,' and is best described by the further title, 'An
Attempt to apply the Principles of Scholarship to English Grammar, with Appendices on Analysis, Spelling,
and Punctuation.' The little book is so sensible and so simple that the greater number of its readers will
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
59


===== PAGE 60 =====
perhaps forget to observe that it is profoundly philosophical also, but it is so in the best sense of the term."--N.
Y. Evening Post.
"Of all subjects of study, it may be safely admitted that grammar possesses as a rule the fewest attractions for
the youthful mind. To prepare a work capable of imparting a thorough knowledge of this important part of
education in an attractive and entertaining form, to many may appear extremely difficult, if not impossible;
nevertheless, the task has been accomplished in a highly successful manner by Edwin A. Abbott, Head Master
of the City of London School, in a neat little volume entitled 'How to Parse.' The author has succeeded
admirably in combining with the exercises a vast amount of useful information, which impacts to the
principles and rules of the main subject a degree of interest that renders the study as attractive as history or
fiction. The value of the book is greatly increased by an excellent glossary of grammatical forms and a nicely
arranged index. The work deserves the attention and consideration of teachers and pupils, and will doubtless
prove a highly popular addition to the list of school-books."--N.Y. Graphic.
* * * * *
Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications.
GOETHE'S
HERMANN AND DOROTHEA.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
BY ELLEN FROTHINGHAM.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.
Thin 8vo, cloth, gilt, bevelled boards. Price $2.00. A cheaper edition, 16mo, cloth. Price $1.00.
"Miss Frothingham's translation is something to be glad of: it lends itself kindly to perusal, and it presents
Goethe's charming poem in the metre of the original.... It is not a poem which could be profitably used in an
argument for the enlargement of the sphere of woman: it teaches her subjection, indeed, from the lips of a
beautiful girl, which are always so fatally convincing; but it has its charm, nevertheless, and will serve at least
for an agreeable picture of an age when the ideal woman was a creature around which grew the beauty and
comfort and security of home."--Atlantic Monthly.
"The poem itself is bewitching. Of the same metre as Longfellow's 'Evangeline,' its sweet and measured
cadences carry the reader onward with a real pleasure as he becomes more and more absorbed in this
descriptive wooing song. It is a sweet volume to read aloud in a select circle of intelligent
friends."--Providence Press.
"Miss Frothingham has done a good service, and done it well, in translating this famous idyl, which has been
justly called 'one of the most faultless poems of modern times.' Nothing can surpass the simplicity, tenderness,
and grace of the original, and these have been well preserved in Miss Frothingham's version. Her success is
worthy of the highest praise, and the mere English reader can scarcely fail to read the poem with the same
delight with which it has always been read by those familiar with the German. Its charming pictures of
domestic life, the strength and delicacy of its characterization, the purity of tone and ardent love of country
which breathe through it, must always make it one of the most admired of Goethe's works."--Boston Christian
Register.
Sold everywhere. Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers,
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
60


===== PAGE 61 =====
ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON
* * * * *
DR. ABBOTT'S WORKS.
HOW TO PARSE. An Attempt to Apply the Principles of Scholarship to English Grammar. With Appendixes
on Analysis, Spelling, and Punctuation. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.
HOW TO TELL THE PARTS OF SPEECH. An Introduction to English Grammar. American edition, revised
and enlarged by Prof. JOHN G. R. McELROY, of the University of Pennsylvania. 16mo. Cloth. Price, 75
cents.
HOW TO WRITE CLEARLY. Rules and Exercises in English Composition. 16mo. Cloth. Price, 60 cents.
ENGLISH LESSONS FOR ENGLISH PEOPLE. Jointly by Dr. ABBOTT and Prof. J. R. SEELEY, M.A., of
Cambridge University, Eng. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.50.
ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,
Boston.
* * * * *
[Transcriber's Notes:
Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as possible, including obsolete and variant
spellings and other inconsistencies.
The transcriber made the following changes to the text to correct obvious errors:
1. p. 90, "inpugned" --> "impugned" 2. p. 51, to qualify "enemy. --> to qualify "enemy."
Text set in bold print is indicated by asterisks, i.e., *Bold*.
It is common to have footnotes referenced multiple times in the text.
Advertisements for Dr. Abbott's other works published by Roberts Brothers have been moved from the front
of the book to the end.
End of Transcriber's Notes]
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO WRITE CLEARLY ***
***** This file should be named 22600-8.txt or 22600-8.zip ***** This and all associated files of various
formats will be found in: http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/0/22600/
Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Richard J. Shiffer and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
61


===== PAGE 62 =====
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a United States copyright in
these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT
GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used
if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies
of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as
creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR
USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using
or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you
agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online
at http://gutenberg.net/license).
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have
read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must
cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom
you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an
electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of
this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation
copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is in the public domain in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to
Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
62


===== PAGE 63 =====
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying,
performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm
work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
outside the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project
Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any
work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is
associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may
copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at www.gutenberg.net
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from the public domain (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use
of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright
holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License
for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any
files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this
electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or
proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format
used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), you
must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any
alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project
Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
63


===== PAGE 64 =====
calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner
of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following
each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at
the address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30
days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You must
require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and
discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a
replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on
different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright
research on, transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored,
may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors,
a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or
Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work
under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU
AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU
AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER
THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT,
CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic
work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending
a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work
electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive
the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in
writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
64


===== PAGE 65 =====
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided
to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation
permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY
- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the
Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise
directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the
widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need, is critical to reaching
Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to
provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections
3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation
organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is
posted at http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are
tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500
West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public support and donations to
carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
65


===== PAGE 66 =====
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status
with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all
50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort,
much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in
locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation
requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states
who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment
of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are
accepted in a number of other ways including including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic
works that could be freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as
Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in
compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.net
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe
to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
A free ebook from http://manybooks.net/
How to Write Clearly, by Edwin A. Abbott
66
